
THE

PAROCHIAL HISTORY

OF

CORNWALL.




J. B. NICHOLS AND SON, 25, PARLIAMENT-STREET.




THE

PAROCHIAL HISTORY

OF

CORNWALL,

FOUNDED ON THE MANUSCRIPT HISTORIES

OF

MR. HALS AND MR. TONKIN;

WITH ADDITIONS AND VARIOUS APPENDICES,

BY

DAVIES GILBERT,

SOMETIME PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY, F.A.S. F.R.S.E. M.R.I.A. &c.
&c. AND D.C.L. BY DIPLOMA FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.


_IN FOUR VOLUMES._

VOL. III.




LONDON:

PUBLISHED BY J. B. NICHOLS AND SON;

AND SOLD BY

  J. LIDDELL, BODMIN; J. LAKE, FALMOUTH; O. MATTHEWS, HELSTON; MESSRS.
    BRAY AND ROWE, LAUNCESTON; T. VIGURS, PENZANCE; MRS. HEARD, TRURO;
    W. H. ROBERTS, EXETER; J. B. ROWE, PLYMOUTH; AND ALL OTHER
    BOOKSELLERS IN CORNWALL AND DEVON.

1838.




HISTORY

OF THE

PARISHES OF CORNWALL.




LANWHITTON, OR LAWHITTON.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lanwhitton, vulgo Lawhitton, is in the hundred of East; and hath to
the west South Pederwin, to the north Launceston, to the east the
river Tamar, to the south Lezant.

As for the name, I take Whitton to be the same as Whidden, white or
fair; so as to signify the white or fair church, from the beauty of
its first building. It is a rectory valued in the King’s books at
19_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._ The Bishop of Exeter is the patron.

All this parish doth in a manner entirely belong to the Bishop of
Exeter’s great manor of Lanwhitton.

I shall begin therewith: Mr. Camden tells you that this was one of the
three manors given by Edward the elder about the year 905 to the
Bishop of Kirton, from whom, on the union of the sees, it came to the
Bishop of Exeter, in whose hands it hath ever since continued.

By an extract from the Register of John de Grandison, Bishop of
Exeter, from 1327 to 1369, it appears that at an Assizes held at
Launceston, before John de Berwick, Walter de Burveton, Henry
Spigurnel, John Ralph, and Henry de Stainton, Justices Itinerant,
Thomas Bishop of Exeter was summoned to answer to our Lord the King by
what authority he held the different royalties in the manors of
Lanwhitton, St. Germans, and Poulton, and certain other privileges in
Tregear and Penryn, with a free market, fairs, &c.; and free warren
over all lands belonging to the see throughout Cornwall. And the said
Bishop, by his attorney, comes into court and saith, That as to the
free market and fairs, and free warren, that the Lord Henry, father to
our Lord the King that now is, did grant to one William, lately Bishop
of Exeter, his predecessor, the said liberties to him and his
successors for ever; and produced the said King’s charter for the
same. And in respect to the liberties, he saith, that himself and his
predecessors have held them from time of which there is no memory,
without interruption, and therefore claims their continuance.

The jurors agree that the said Bishop and his predecessors had the
said liberties, &c. in his manor of Penryn; but as for the manor of
Tregear, that he and his predecessors had the same liberties from his
and their villains, and not from their free tenants, a tempore quo non
extat memoria, sine intermissione.

The Bishops of Exeter have been accustomed to farm out their manor on
lives to several gentlemen. The present farmers are――Francis Manaton,
Esq., William Clowberry, Esq., and Edward Bennet, of Hexworthy, Esq.

I now come to treat of the remarkable places of the said manor; and
first of the barton Hexworthy.

Hexworthy――the field of reeds, corrupted, by pronunciation, from hesk
or hesken, a reed or bulrush, and the Saxon worthing, a field. This
place has been for three or four descents the seat of the family of
Bennet. The present possessor, Edward Bennet, Esq., has been twice
married; first, to a daughter of Sir Walter Moyle, of Bake; and,
secondly, to a daughter of ―――― Coffin, Esq., of Portledge, in
Devonshire. The arms of Bennet are Gu. a Bezant between three
demi-lions Arg.

Bullsworthy, id est, the Bull’s-field (qu.? Ed.) This was lately the
seat, by copy of court roll under the farmers of this manor, of John
Coren, Esq., who in the reign of Queen Anne was in the Commission of
the Peace, and Deputy-Surveyor of the Duchy of Cornwall, who dying
without issue, left his estate to his widow; and on her decease it
fell to the three gentlemen above-named, lessees of the manor. Mr.
Coren derived himself from the Corens of St. Stephen’s, in Branwell,
and gave for his arms, Arg. a millrind between two martlets in fess
Sab. He left a part of his estate to a younger brother, now (November
1735) a captain of foot.


THE EDITOR.

The church of this parish, although gone much into decay, is said to
exhibit appearances of venerable antiquity. In it is a monument to the
memory of Richard Bennet, counsellor at law, who died in 1619. And
another of artificial stone, with the following inscription:――

  Underneath lieth the body of Richard Coffin, Esq.
  and also some of his nearest and dearest relations,
  who resided for many generations at Hexworthy, in this county.
  He was the son of Edward Bennet and Honor his wife,
  daughter of Richard Coffin, of Portledge in Devon, Esq.
  and Honor his wife, who was daughter of Edmund Prideaux, of
    Padstow, Esq. in this county.
  Dying without issue, in him ended the lineal descent of
  the families of Bennet and Coffin.
  He was born in the year 1715, and died Sept. 30, 1796.

This gentleman gave Hexworthy to one of his relations, the Prideauxes
of Padstow.

The lessees of the great manor having neglected to renew their
holding, it reverted to Doctor George Lavington, Bishop of Exeter fom
1746 to 1762, who made a new lease in favour of his only child,
afterwards married to the Rev. Nutcombe Nutcombe, Chancellor of the
Cathedral, in whose three daughters or their families it still
remains.

The Editor cannot quit this parish without noticing that here resided
as rector during many years the Rev. Robert Walker, who once
entertained thoughts of really executing, what is now feebly
attempted, a parochial history of Cornwall. The Editor well remembers
waiting on him in 1787, to make inquiries respecting some of his own
ancestors, when Mr. Walker, then far advanced in life, received him
with the utmost kindness, insisted on his taking refreshments, and
when they were declined on the ground of giving him trouble, Mr.
Walker remarked, that such trouble was at once a duty and a pleasure,
since our most important business in this world was to accommodate
each other, and to make each other happy.

In a letter from him dated November the 9th, of the same year, the
parish is written Lewhitton.

Mr. Walker is said to have been born in 1699.

  Lawhitton measures 2455 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2715    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           246   15    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {   289    |   368    |    435     |   485
    giving an increase of nearly 68 per cent. in thirty years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. J. D. Coleridge, collated by Bishop Carey
    in 1826.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are very similar to those of Launceston.
Where argillaceous earth, either alone or in conjunction with
carbonate of lime, prevails in these rocks, the soil produced from
them is very fertile; but sometimes silica is so predominant, that the
ground is comparatively barren.




LELANT.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lelant is in the hundred of Penwith, and hath to the west Towednack,
to the north St. Ives, to the east the river Hayle and St. Ives Bay,
to the south St. Earth and Ludgvan.

I take Lelant to be compounded of Le, a place, and Lan, a church, so
as to signify the church place. It is dedicated to St. Uny, and
therefore hath the adjunct of Uny Lelant mostly used in writings. But
Leland calls it Lannant; and if that be the right name, it is a church
in a valley. In the Taxatio Ecclesiastica of Pope Nicholas, Lanvanta
or Laventa is rated at 15_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._

It is a vicarage valued in the King’s book together with St. Ives and
Tewednack, which pass in the same presentation, at 22_l._ 11_s._
10_d._ The patronage in the Bishop of Exeter. The sheaf and tithe of
fish in Lord Hobart, as heir to Sir John Maynard, who got possession
of them from Edward Noseworthy, Esq.

St. Uny, to whom not only this church, but also that of Redruth, and a
ruined chapel in St. Wendrone, are dedicated, is by Leland called St.
Unine.


THE EDITOR.

The church of this parish is situated in the midst of sand, at the
very extreme point inclosed by the sea, and by the estuary of Hayle.
It is said to have been almost entirely covered towards the early part
of the last century by one of these immense drifts of shell-sand which
occasionally overwhelm this coast, originating, as is supposed, from
the Nympha Bank, lying about midway between the Land’s End and Cape
St. Clear. The Editor has in his possession the following receipt for
money contributed by his collateral ancestor towards clearing the
church, and accommodating it for the celebration of divine service;
which was then done, and the old church restored――not a new one
constructed, as some writers on Cornwall have erroneously stated.

       August 11th, 1738.
     Mr. Hugh Powley and Mr. John Pears received of Mr. Henry
     Davies for bounty money towards Lelant church, twenty-six
     pounds five shillings, as appears by the church book.
                                               THOMAS KNIVETON.

Several great inundations of sand appear to have covered this coast at
distant and uncertain periods; but the comminuted shells are
perpetually increasing on the sea-shore, from whence they are drifted
over the adjacent lands: their progress has, however, been checked,
and in some places almost arrested, by the simple expedient of
planting the Arundo Arenaria of Linnæus, named by others,
Calamagrestis Arenaria. This rush grows readily in the sand, where it
mechanically opposes all motion on the surface, and ultimately favours
the production of a grassy turf.

Tradition asserts, that a town of some magnitude, having a market, and
the establishment of a custom-house, stood near the church, when Hayle
afforded deep water without the aid of artificial works, and before
St. Ives had risen into consequence. Foundations of houses have
undoubtedly been discovered here under the sand; and the tradition is
somewhat confirmed by a distinction paid to the principal village,
which is universally called Lelant Town, and not Church Town, as in
other parishes.

The town is divided into two separate portions, usually distinguished
as higher or lower, but the latter was formerly called Tredreath, the
town on the sand or beach. This parish has several other villages:
Brunion, Trecrobben, giving name to the most picturesque granite hill
in that whole district, Polpear, Trink, &c.

In the taxation of Pope Nicholas, Lelant, under the name of Lanvanta
or Laventa, is rated at 15_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._ without any notice of St.
Ives or Towednack.

Lelant, as the mother church, is alone of the three parishes provided
with a glebe; but this land, although more extensive than what falls,
on an average, to neighbouring incumbents, is rendered of very little
value, and totally unfitted for a residence, by the encroachment of
sand. An ancient vicarage house is believed to have disappeared with
the town at the last great inundation, and the parish has remained
longer than the period of memory, without a resident clergyman; but in
this very year (1835) the Reverend Uriah Tonkin having been most
liberally accommodated with an elevated situation at some distance
from the sea, by Mr. Praed, is now constructing a house adequate to
every thing that can be wished.

The rectorial tithes are said by Mr. Lysons to have been given by
Robert de Cardinham, in the reign of Richard Cœur de Lion, to the
monastery of Tywardreath; but that afterwards they were appropriated
to the College of Crediton. Although this college has in part survived
the general devastation of King Henry the Eighth, yet the tithes of
Lelant were taken from it, and after passing through various hands,
they now belong to Mr. Praed.

Mr. Lysons also states, but without giving any authority, that St. Uny
(a brother of St. Herygh), patron of Lelant, Crowan, and Redruth, was
buried in this church.

If St. Uny and St. Herygh ever existed at all, they were probably two
of the missionaries from Ireland.

The parish feast is celebrated on the nearest Sunday to Candlemas day,
but supposed to be in commemoration of the Saint.

Trembetha is said to have been the seat of John Hals, one of the
judges in the reign of King Henry the Fifth, and to have been sold by
him to the Godolphins. In the time of Queen Elizabeth it belonged to
the Mahons. The barton and manor are now the joint property of Mr.
Praed and Mr. Champernowne, of Dartington, near Totnes, as to
two-thirds; and the remaining share is divided between Mr. Tremayne,
Mr. Rodd, and Mrs. Stephens, as coheirs of the family of Hearle.

Lelant was for centuries the residence of three old and respectable
families――Praed, Hoskin, and Pawley. The Hoskins still remain
possessed of their ancient freehold, and other property; and Mr. Henry
Hoskins, the present head of the family, resides in a house at the
northern extremity of Tredreath, or Lower Lelant Town, bearing all the
marks which distinguished the dwellings of private gentlemen in the
times of the Tudors or Plantagenets. The Pawleys are extinct, having
declined through a series of years; Goonwhyn, or Gunwin, (the White
Croft) where the family had long resided, together with some other
remnants of property, came to Miss Jane Pawley, sufficient, however,
to give her the reputation of an heiress: but misfortunes and
disgraceful conduct reduced her so very low, that the Editor
recollects her soliciting charity from those who once looked up to her
superior station; and this representative of an ancient family closed
her mortal career in a parish workhouse.

The Praeds are also extinct; but the name has, with singular felicity,
arrived at tenfold splendour in a new dynasty.

The original family became at last represented by two brothers: the
elder distinguished as Colonel Praed, married a Basset of Tehidy, but
died soon after, leaving all the personal property to his widow: the
younger brother succeeded to the real estate; but having been
unsuccessfully engaged in trade, and finding the farms mostly leased
on lives with the payment of small quit-rents, according to the custom
of those times, he became more and more embarrassed; till, meeting
with a gentleman of the family of Mackworth, in Glamorganshire, bred
to the higher department of the law, he arranged with this gentleman,
that on being freed from all pecuniary difficulties, and receiving a
certain annuity for life, the whole Cornish estate should be
transferred to Mr. Mackworth; on the further conditions of his taking
the name of Praed, and what seems almost ludicrous, of his engaging,
so far as the consent of one party could be sufficient, to marry Miss
Penrose, of Penrose, near Helston, the heiress-at-law to Mr. Praed’s
estate.

Mr. Praed died about the years 1716 or 1717, when Mr. Mackworth came
into possession, having performed every engagement to the utmost of
his power; for the Editor recollects having heard from his son, the
late Mr. Humphrey Mackworth Praed, that his father went to Penrose in
execution of the condition dependent on another; but that, so far from
obtaining success, he found some difficulty in escaping with his life.

The validity of the transfer was ultimately disputed on the part of
Miss Penrose; and Mr. Humphrey Mackworth Praed has told the Editor
that he was present at the trial in his nurse’s arms, when the
agreement was finally established. The lady married a gentleman of the
name of Pearse, and left an only daughter, who married Mr. Cumming;
and their great-grandson, Sir Alexander Cumming Gordon, of Elginshire,
is the present representative of the former family of Trevethow.

Mr. Mackworth Praed settled at Trevethow, where he was succeeded by
his eldest son, Mr. Humphrey Mackworth Praed, one of the most
distinguished men in his adopted country, for abilities, acquirements,
wit, knowledge of the world, kindness, and unbounded hospitality. He
once represented the county in Parliament, and on another occasion the
borough of St. Ives. He married a lady of the eminent family of
Forrester, in Shropshire, widow of Sir Bryant Broughton Delves, and
had six children: William, his eldest son and heir; Herbert, Rector of
Ludgvan, who died in early life; and four daughters,――Catherine, Mary,
Arabella, and Julia.

Mary married the Reverend William Sandys, Vicar of St. Minver, and
died without leaving any family. The other three never married.

Mr. William Praed married Miss Backwell, of Tyringham, in
Buckinghamshire, eventually sole heiress to her very opulent family.
He represented St. Ives in several Parliaments, and Banbury in one.

Endowed with a strong mind and with an active disposition, Mr. Praed
did not confine his public services to the discharge of duties in the
House of Commons. To him the nation is mainly indebted for one of the
most useful and most successful of our public works――The Grand
Junction Canal.

Three extensive chalk ridges issue from the great central nucleus
forming Salisbury Plain; the most southern terminates at Beachy-head,
constituting what is called the South Downs. The middle range, passing
through Hampshire, Surrey, and Kent, extends to Dover, inclosing
between them the wealds of Kent and Sussex, with the Hastings sand
formation, and the great alluvial deposits of Romney and Pevensey
Marshes. The northern range is still more extensive than the other
two: this, passing through Buckinghamshire and Bedfordshire, traverses
Cambridgeshire and Lincolnshire; then, after being cut through by the
Wash, re-appears in Yorkshire, and finally terminates its long course
at Flamborough Head. These two latter ranges intercept all water
communication between the capital and the interior of England, except
by the Thames, which finds its way through the northern ridge of chalk
above Reading. Most river navigations beyond the reach of tides, are
impeded by shallows in summer, by floods in winter, by artificial
rights of mills, drainages, &c., all of which are avoided by the Grand
Junction Canal, which, availing itself of cross valleys, and
perforating narrow ridges, has opened an inland navigation from the
metropolis to the British Channel, to the Irish Sea, and to the German
Ocean.

Mr. William Praed closed his useful and honourable career of life at
Trevethow, in Oct. 1833, having completed his eighty-fourth year; and
is succeeded by his eldest son, Mr. James Praed, recently elected
member for Buckinghamshire, the county in which he principally
resides. Mr. Praed married Miss Chaplin, of Lincolnshire, and has
several children.

If this distinguished family should now unfortunately be lost to
Cornwall, it is curious to remark that, after remaining there much
above a century, no permanent connexion has been formed, and not a
single relative will be left behind.

Trevethow is by its natural situation one of the finest places in the
west of Cornwall. The house looks to the estuary of Hayle, over a park
variegated by rising ground and vales; and immediately behind the
house stands Trecrobben or Trencroben-hill, crowned by an ancient
fortress, corresponding with those described by Dr. Barham in the
third volume of the Transactions of the Geological Society of
Cornwall; this hill is the last towards the killas formation of a
granite district, extending from the Land’s End, and covered with
rocks of a magnitude to create strong impressions of grandeur. The
house was so much enlarged and decorated by Mr. Humphrey Mackworth
Praed, as almost to claim him for its founder; and it is sheltered by
trees more numerous and of a larger size than can usually be found in
a country unfavourable to their growth.

But the great artificial ornament of this place is its extensive
plantations. Mr. Humphrey Mackworth Praed displayed on this
comparatively trifling subject, the same acumen which distinguished
him in matters of importance, throughout a long life. Having observed
a single pinaster fir, the Pinus Pinaster of Linnæus, growing in an
exposed situation, and braving the violence of our west wind, Mr.
Praed immediately conjectured that this tree might be rendered
available not merely for ornament, but as affording a shelter for
better trees; the experiment was immediately tried, and with complete
success.

The pinaster loses all its beauty when it gets beyond the dimensions
of a shrub: its wood in this climate is almost useless, and no tree
ceases to live after so short a period; but it grows rapidly at first
in all situations, and almost in any ground, so that mixed with
deciduous trees, and planted round the exterior, it acts as a nurse,
and the office is fully performed long before the termination of its
short existence.

By this use of the pinaster fir, Cornwall is now acquiring valuable
and decorative plantations of the best timber trees, for all which it
is indebted to the example given by Mr. Praed.

  Lelant measures 3,279 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3165    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           462   15    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {   1083   |   1180   |    1271    |   1602
  giving an increase of 48 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The western part of this parish rests on granite, which is generally
coarse-grained and crystalline, often with large porphyritic crystals
of felspar; here and there it contains beds of porphyry (elvan
courses), and also of shorl rock, sometimes in masses, but more
frequently in the form of large and irregular veins. This granite has
been productive of metallic ores, and more particularly of tin. The
eastern part is composed of rocks belonging to the porphyritic series.
The principal varieties are felspar rock, both massive and schistose,
and green-stone. The soil derived from these rocks, as is often the
case near granite, is on some spots very fertile. Some land near the
entrance into Hayle is covered with testaceous sand, so common in the
vicinity of all the bays and inlets of the sea on the north coast of
Cornwall, and which, whenever it is unprotected by vegetation, is
drifted by the winds over the uncultivated lands. Nature has pointed
out the remedy for this evil to be the diffusion and increase of
arenaceous plants.


THE EDITOR.――Whele Reath, a mine on the extreme western border of this
parish, where it joins Towednack, has proved more productive of tin
than any other mine except Whele Vor; and it has been prosecuted to a
depth unexampled till within these few years, even in mines of copper.

At the other extremity of the parish, near the sea-shore, both copper
and tin have been found in the belt of green stone which generally
interposes between the granite and the sea-shore.




LESKEARD.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Leskeard is situate in the hundred of West, and hath to the west St.
Pinnock, to the north St. Clair, to the east Menhinnet, to the south
St. Kaine, and St. Matin’s juxta Looe.

As for the name of this town and parish, I derive it from les, a court
or palace, and kaer, a fortified town, as having been for many ages a
seat and castle of the ancient Princes and Dukes of Cornwall. Mr.
Carew’s derivation from les-broad and ker-gone, is so much out of the
way that it is not worth confuting; neither doth he himself put any
stress on it.

This parish is a vicarge, valued in the King’s Books at £18. 13_s._
10_d._ The patronage in Mr. Blatchford.

This church, in A. D. 1291, 29 Edward I., was valued at £8. and the
vicarage at £2. 13_s._ 4_d._ it being appropriated to the Priory of
Launceston.

The great duchy manor of the same name, including the whole parish and
borough, I shall first begin with it, and then go on with the town,
the church, castle, and the other most noted places in it.


THE MANOR OF LESKEARD.

In the extent of Cornish acres 12 Edward I. this is valued in 18. The
3d Henry IV. this manor is said to be half of a small fee of Morton,
and was then in the hand of the King; who had not then, it seems, as
may be made out in other places of the same book, given livery to
Prince Henry of all the lands belonging to the Duchy of Cornwall; but
since that time it having gone with the rest of the Duchy of Cornwall,
and accounted for accordingly, I need not say any more of it here; and
so come to treat of the


TOWN OF LESKEARD.

Mr. Willis, in his Rot. Parliamentaria, vol. ii. p. 27, gives this
account of it: “This borough was, in like manner as spoken of in
Launceston, held in the time of the Conqueror by Robert Earl of Morton
and Cornwall; and afterwards, as that did, belonged to Richard,
brother to King Henry the Third, created Earl of Cornwall in the 15th
year of his reign, who made this place a free borough, and granted to
the burgesses all those liberties and free customs which he, by his
charter, had before granted to his burgesses of Launceston and
Helston. This charter is dated the 5th of June, anno 1240, in the 24th
year of the reign of his brother King Henry the Third, about ten years
after the date of Launceston charter, as I guess. To this Richard
succeeded Edmund Earl of Cornwall, his son, who in the 3d year of the
reign of Edward I. granted this whole burgh, with the rent of the
same, &c. and toll of the market and fairs, and all fines, mulcts, and
perquisites thereof belonging to him and his heirs, in fee farm, at
the rent of £18 sterling; upon which conditions the said borough being
leased to the townsmen, has remained in their hands ever since, and
the corporation at present enjoy the profits of the fairs and markets,
&c. which yield them about £200 per annum. The royalty of this borough
has been in like manner as that at Launceston, vested in the Duchy
ever since Edward the Third’s time; and the Dukes of Cornwall, as
tenants of the Crown, have received the said fee-farm rent till the
reign of the late King William, who alienated the same, and gave it to
the present Lord Somers, to whom the corporation pay the abovesaid
chief rent of £18.”

Leland, Itinerary, vol. iii. lob. 19, saith, “The towne knowlegith
freedom and privileges by the gift of Richard, King of Romanes and
Earl of Cornewaul.” Perhaps by him this place was antiently
incorporated; but the present charter doth not say when or by whom,
for thus runs the last Visitation: “The towne and burrough of
Liskeret, alias Liskerd, was antiently incorporated by the name of
Mayor and Burgesses of Liskeret, alias Liskerd, and re-incorporated
the 6th day of July, in the 29th year of Queen Elizabeth, by the same
name of Mayor and Burgesses, and by that name to have perpetual
succession; and enabled in law to purchase lands, tenements, and
liberties, and likewise to assign the same, and by the same name to
plead and be impleaded; and that the borough and corporation should
consist of 9 Burgesses, which shall be called the Common Councell of
the said burrough, whereof one for the time being shall be yearly
chosen for Mayor, to have power to chuse a Steward and Recorder. That
the Mayor and Burgesses shall have a common seal for their affairs;
and that the Mayor and Recorder shall be Justices of the Peace within
the said burrough (of which new corporation, granted by Queen
Elizabeth, John Hunkin was the first Mayor), with diverse other
privileges and immunities, as by their charter doth appear. And at
this present visitation, the 12th day of October, 1620, was Edward
Chapman, Mayor, Sᵗ William Wrey, Knight, Recorder, John Hunkin, Gent.
High Steward, Thomas Jane, John Vosper, Martin Sampson, John Pott,
Jeffrie Clarke, John Taperell, and William Grege, Chief Burgesses, and
Walter Nicholls, Town Clark, of the said town and burrough.”

Mr. Willis goes on: “As for the right of election of Members of
Parliament, ’tis vested in these nine capital burgesses and fifteen
assistants, with others who are free of the borough, as many of the
neighbouring gentlemen are; so that the whole number of electors is
near about 100, who are all sworn freemen. The town of Leskeard is
very large and populous, and contains (as I am informed) about 500
houses. It has a very considerable market, and perhaps the greatest in
this county. It was in Leland’s time the best except Bodmin, which it
much exceeds now, [this is a great mistake,] as the town does in
buildings. This being in all respects one of, if not the biggest and
best built in Cornwall [I take Falmouth to exceed by much every way,
and so doth Truro too in building, if not bigness]; ’tis situate
partly on rocky hills, and partly in a bottom. On the eastern ascent
of the hill stands the church (of which more by and by). On the north
side of the town stood the castle, of which Leland speaks thus: ‘There
was a castle on an hill in the town side, by north from St. Martin. It
is now all in ruin; fragments and pieces of waulles yet stand. The
site of it is magnificent, and looketh over all the town. This castle
was the Earles of Cornwall.’”

Mr. Willis continues: “In this town is an admirable conduit of water
(this Leland too mentions), which plentifully supplies the streets
about the market-place, which lies in a bottom about the middle of the
borough; and from thence branch several other streets, divers of which
lie on steep ascents. The town is near four furlongs over every way,
and in some parts the houses stand scattered, though the streets are
generally broad. This is one of the towns for coinage of tin (but
there are hardly ―――― blocks of tin coined here in a whole year, the
works in its neighbourhood being rather neglected than worn out); and
was remarkable, anno 1642, for the defeat of the Parliament army by
Sir Ralph Hopton, a memorial of which was put up in the church. The
market, in Leland’s time mentioned to be observed on the Monday, is
now kept on Saturday. The town hall stands on stone pillars, and is a
good building. At the top is a clock-turret, having four dials. It was
erected about the year 1707, by Mr. Dolben, one of the Members for
this town, at near £200 expense. There has been given also to this
corporation very handsome presents of plate, with two large silver
maces well gilt, as are several of their silver cups, round one of
which, in most constant use, is this engraved:

  ‘Qui fallit poculum, fallit in omnibus.’”


THE EDITOR.

Leskeard still continues a place of considerable trade, and
distinguished by its excellent market, although in relative importance
it does not maintain the station among towns in the county assigned to
it a hundred years since by Mr. Tonkin. Of late years, several persons
possessed of large properties have decorated the environs with
excellent houses; and one gentleman of the town, Mr. Lyne, has brought
home from successful trade and speculation, conducted at Lisbon by
himself and his uncles during two-thirds of a century, a fortune that
may be denominated princely. Leskeard has benefited beyond most other
towns by the recent improvements of roads, and by a canal from the
port of Looe, which affords a cheap and easy conveyance for lime, the
most important of all manures in that district.

This town has been the residence, if not the origin, of several
distinguished persons.

Dr. William Jane, Regius Professor of Divinity at Oxford in the time
of Charles the Second, was from hence. And I believe that Mr. Jane,
for many years master of the grammar-school at Truro, was his nephew;
and this gentleman’s son, first a student at Christchurch, and
afterwards Rector of Iron Acton, in Gloucestershire, bore a
conspicuous part among the learned divines of his day.

From hence also originated the family of Taunton; of whom Mr. William
Elias Taunton, knighted on some occasion of the King visiting Oxford,
attained the highest eminence in that city as a legal practitioner;
and he had the satisfaction of seeing his eldest son attain the proud
situation of a judge. Of this family is also Richard Taunton, M.D.
distinguished by his eager pursuit of all scientific acquirements, as
well as by his medical skill; now resident at Truro. To this
gentleman’s liberality the Editor is indebted for the original
manuscript of Mr. Hals’ Parochial History, the foundation of this
work.

Among eminent persons residing at Leskeard, it is impossible to omit
Mr. Haydon, for many years master of the grammar-school. Of his
classical acquirements it may be sufficient to say that Dr. Cornelius
Cardew, who has been mentioned under St. Ewan, and must be again under
Truro, was his favourite scholar; but, in addition to literature, Mr.
Haydon acquired a profound knowledge of mathematics and of astronomy;
and in these, the most exact and the most noble of sciences, he was
not content with theory, and with the practical result of labours
carried on by others. Mr. Haydon provided himself with various
instruments, of a size and accuracy rarely possessed by individuals at
that period; and with those he made important observations on the
transit of Venus in June 1769; and for a long time all the longitudes
of places in the West of England were deduced from Mr. Haydon’s
determination of Leskeard. He ultimately retired to the family living
of Okeford, in Devonshire, and was succeeded in the school by Mr.
Lyne, whose grandson has been noticed for his acquisition of an
immense fortune.

A gentleman of very singular habits flourished at Leskeard through a
large portion of the eighteenth century, the last of an ancient and
respectable family, Trehawke. No one stood more prominent for ability,
knowledge of business, or for integrity; all disputes were referred to
his arbitration, and every one pressed eagerly to obtain his advice;
but habits of parsimony grew on him to such an extent, that the most
ridiculous tales were circulated of his private savings, without,
however, detracting from the estimation in which he was otherwise
held. Having decupled his fortune, he left the whole to a distant
relation, Mr. Kekewich, since Member for Exeter, a gentleman
altogether worthy of so splendid a gift.

Mr. Lysons says, “In the town of Liskeard was a nunnery of poor
Clares, founded and endowed by Richard King of the Romans,” but of
which he had not been able to obtain any further account. But this
seems to be a mistake; as Richard King of the Romans died in 1271, and
the Nuns of St. Clare were first brought into England by Blanch Queen
of Navarre, and wife of Edmund Earl of Lancaster, about twenty years
afterwards. The monastic remains appear, moreover, too magnificent for
an establishment of Nuns Minories, or Poor Clares, the female branch
of the begging monks or friars instituted by St. Francis.

The castle walls have entirely disappeared, but the elevated site is
still conspicuous; it is surrounded with trees, and the centre is
occupied by the school-house.

The church is among the largest in Cornwall, and its south wall, like
that of St. Neot, is embattled, and also ornamented by a handsome
porch. There is a tradition which describes this church as being
decorated with two towers, one on each side of the building, but taken
down in the year 1627. The existing western tower is very inferior to
the church.

The great tithes of this parish were appropriated to the Priory of
Launceston. They were granted by Queen Elizabeth to a Mr. Harris, and
they have recently been sold in parcels to the various proprietors of
land. Mr. Honey, who holds the vicarage, is also patron.

In the church are various monuments to the family of Trehawke, &c. and
one to Joseph Wadham, who died in 1707; being the last of that family,
founders of Wadham college, Oxford.

The house and the room are still shewn which were occupied by King
Charles the First in August 1644, before the surrender at Fowey of the
army commanded by Lord Essex.

Mr. Lysons gives an account of the various persons and estates in this
parish. The chief proprietors are Mr. Kekewich and Mrs. Connock. The
extensive property of the Moreheads has been entirely sold in various
lots, and their manor of Lamellian, or Lamellin, now belongs to the
Editor of this work.

The borough, made co-extensive with the parish by the Reform Act of
1832, sends one Member to Parliament.

There cannot be a question as to the first syllable in the name of
this town being les, a court, or inclosure; and the second may
probably be derived, as Mr. Tonkin conjectures, from kaer, a fortress;
but in times when every thing was referred to the French language, les
became changed into lis, and a flower-de-luce was adopted on the town
seal.

  The parish measures 7126 statute acres.

  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815:
             Borough                         7077    0    0
             Parish                          6153    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831:
             Borough                         1009    7    0
             Parish                           801    4    0
  Population,       in 1801, in 1811, in 1821, in 1831,

             Borough   1860     1975     2423     2853
             Parish     848      909     1096     1189
                                                  ――――
                                         Together 4042,
    giving an increase on the borough of 53½ per cent.; on the parish
      of 42 per cent.; on both of 49 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. T. Foote, instituted in 1821.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are principally on the boundary of the
porphyritic and calcareous series; partaking of the former in the
northern part, and of the latter in the southern. The former sometimes
nearly resemble hornblende schist; and, gradually leaving the
hornblende, they pass into a coarse, lamellar, argillaceous rock, of a
dirty yellowish brown colour, irregularly and indistinctly marked with
blue spots. There are several large quarries in this rock round the
town of Leskeard, where the stone is extensively used for building. It
very nearly approaches in character to that of Bodmin, but is not
quite similar.

THE EDITOR. At a short distance from the town, on the road side
leading towards Plymouth, occurs a soft micaceous schist, of a deep
yellow tinge, which was most unfortunately mistaken for an ore of
gold, about fifty years since, by a Mr. Hoskin, of Leskeard, and by
his son, a clergyman, who, in utter ignorance of modern science,
expended considerable sums of money in erecting machinery, for the
prosecution of pursuits so vain as the raising of gold ore and
extracting the metal.




LESNEWITH.

HALS.


The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lesnewith is in the hundred of the same name, and hath to the west
Trevalgar, to the north Tintagell and Minster, to the east Otterham,
to the south Davidstow.

I have always imagined, whether rightly or not I am not certain, that
this place, instead of giving name to the hundred, changed its own,
when this was divided into two hundreds, Strathan and Lesnewith;
having been formerly but one hundred, called Trigg Major, as they
still continue in respect to ecclesiastical affairs; and if so, then
the name signifies the New Court.

This is a rectory valued in the King’s book at £8, the incumbent Mr.
Crewys.

This church, in 1291, by the taxation of Pope Nicholas, was valued at
£4. 6_s._ 8_d._ never having been appropriated.

I shall begin with the principal estate in this parish, the manor of
Lesnewith.

In the third year of Henry IV. Henry de la Pomeroy held here and in
Trevygham half a knight’s fee.

I fancy this to be the same which is called in Domesday Book by the
name of Lisniwen. And if so, it was one of the manors which William
the Conqueror gave to his half-brother the Earl of Morton, with the
earldom of Cornwall.


THE EDITOR.

There does not appear to be any thing remarkable in this parish. The
only village, except the church town, is Treworrell.

The manor of Grylls in this parish formerly belonged to the Betensons,
who intermarried with the Gilberts of Tackbear; and their arms remain
in the church, Argent, within a bordure engrailed Ermine, a fess
Gules, with a lion passant gardant in chief.

The advowson of the rectory is annexed to the manor of Lesnewith,
which belonged two centuries ago to the family of Dennis. It was a
considerable time in the family of Glynn. Mr. Jose is the chief
proprietor in the parish.

  Lesnewith measures 1,734 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          1,400    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           133   16    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    104   |    105   |     123    |    127
    giving an increase of 22 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Charles Worsley, instituted in 1813.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Under the head of St. Cleather, a peculiar calcareous rock was
noticed, consisting of a variety of hornblende and calc spar, either
distinctly conjoined in a granular or laminated form, or so intimately
blended, as to form an homogeneous green rock. A large bed of this
peculiar rock occurs at Grylls or Garles, near the western boundary of
the parish. An attempt was made here to burn this rock as a limestone
for agricultural purposes; but after several trials it was abandoned;
for, unless great care be taken in selecting those parts alone in
which calc spar mainly abounds, the whole charge of the kiln
vitrifies, or runs into a slag, owing to the great fusibility of
hornblende, the other constituent of this calcareous rock.




LESTWITHIEL.

HALS.


The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lestwithiel is in the hundred of Powder, and is surrounded to the
west, north, and south, by Lanlivery; to the east it has Fowy river
between it and St. Winnow. As for the name, I take it to be a
corruption of Les-uchel, i. e. the lofty place, as having been from
all antiquity the chief seat of the Dukes, &c. of Cornwall. Mr. Camden
in Cornwall saith, “the Uzella of Ptolemy is seated, and has not yet
quite lost its name, being called at this day Lestuthiell, from its
situation. Now uchel, in British, signifies the same as _high_ and
_lofty_.” But of this more when we come to describe the town. As for
Mr. Carew’s derivation, who calls it Lostwithiel, from the Cornish
Losswithiall, which in English, saith he, signifieth a lion’s tail, it
is so ridiculous, as not to be worth repeating; neither doth the word
carry that sense. This parish is a vicarage, valued in the King’s
books at £2. 13_s._ 4_d._

The Duke of Cornwall is patron. The incumbent Mr. Baron, who succeeded
Mr. Whiteford.

This church is not valued in Tax. Benefic. anno 1291; and was then
appropriated to the Priory of Bodmin.


THE TOWN AND BOROUGH OF LESTWITHIEL,

“Reputed,” saith Mr. Willis, “the ancient Uzella of Ptolemy, lies
situated on the river Uzella,” (I wonder how Mr. Willis came to be
guilty of this mistake, since both Leland and Camden, whom he quotes,
tell him that it lies on the river Fowy,) “from which it more probably
had its name, as the learned Camden thinks” (Mr. Camden says as I have
quoted him above,) “than from Carew’s interpretation of the word
Lestwithiel, which he would have to signify in English, lion’s tail.
This town is reputed in former times to have stood on a high hill,
where the old castle of Lestormel showeth its ruins, which with a park
thereto belonging, lies on the north side of the town” (and is in the
parish of Lanlivery, for which reason it is not treated of here). “In
the park was a Chapel of the Trinity, long since defaced, as are the
public buildings of the town, insomuch that little remains of them;
though some small parts are repaired, and made use of for the prisons
and courts belonging to the Tin Stannaries, which are appointed to be
kept here, this being one of the coinage towns.”

Before I go on any further with Mr. Willis, it may be proper to insert
at length what Mr. Camden saith of it. “More within the land, on the
same river (Fowy), the Uzella of Ptolemy is seated; and has not quite
lost its name, being called at this day Lestuthiell, from its
situation; for it was upon a high hill, where is Listormel, an ancient
castle; though now it is removed into the valley. Now Uchel, British,
signifies the same as high and lofty; from whence Uxellodunum of Gaule
is so termed, because the town being built upon a mountain, has a
steep rugged ascent every way. This in the British history is called
Pen-Uchel-Coit, a high mountain in a wood, by which some will have
Exeter meant. But the situation assigned it by Ptolemy, and the name
it has to this day, do sufficiently evince it to have been the ancient
Uzella. Now it is a little town, and not at all populous; for the
channel of the river Fowy, which in the last age used to carry the
tide up to the very town, and bring vessels of burthen, is now so
stopped up by the sands coming from the tin-mines, that it is too
shallow for barges; and indeed, all the havens in this county are in
danger of being choaked up by their sands. However, it is the county
town, where the Sheriff every month holds the County Court, and the
Warden of the Stannaries has his prison. For it has the privilege of
coinage, by the favour (as they say) of Edmund Earl of Cornwall, who
formerly had his palace there. But there are two towns which
especially eclipse the glory of this Uzella,――Leskerd to the east, and
Bodman to the north.” Now to return to Mr. Willis. “It is a very
ancient corporation, belonging to the Duchy, having had great
privileges conferred upon it by Richard Earl of Cornwall (so saith
Leland, Itinerary, vol. III. fol. 16,) who, when he was King of the
Romans, in the twelfth year of his reign, by charter dated at
Wallington, made Lostwithiel and Penknek (alias Penkneth, in the
parish of Lanliversey, for Lanlivery, saith Leland, in the above cited
place,) a place near adjoining, and now part of the borough, one free
burgh, and granted his burgesses a gild mercatory, &c. When this place
was first incorporated, I have not been informed; but it has returned
Members to Parliament ever since 4 Edw. II. and once before, viz. 23
Edw. I. The Representatives are chosen by the majority of the
Corporation, which consists of seven capital burgesses (whereof one is
Mayor), and seventeen assistants, in whom, as I presume, the fee-farm
rent of the borough is vested, who hold the same, or not many years
since did, of the Duchy. This Corporation (otherwise a poor one) holds
also the anchorage in the harbour, and bryhelage of measureable
commodities, as coals, salt, malt, and corn, &c. in the town of Fowey;
which port lies lower on this river, which was navigable to this town
before the sands barred it up. The town of Lestwithiel consists
chiefly of two streets, from east to west, meanly built, and has in it
a church (of which more at the end).

“In August 1644, some soldiers of the Parliament Army, as may be seen
in Dugdale’s Short View of the late Troubles in England, p. 560,
defaced several stately edifices in this town, as the great Hall and
Exchequer of the Dukes of Cornwall, who had their palace here in times
past; this having been formerly reputed the shire town of the county,
a small branch of which it yet retaineth, viz. the election of knights
of the shire, and keeping the county weights and measures, which it
had assigned by Act of Parliament, anno 11 Hen. VII. Who held this
manor (note, that this place is no manor, but Penknek,) at the making
of Domesday Book, the learned Dr. Brady could not discover; but no
doubt it was reckoned among those of Robert Earl of Moreton and
Cornwall, the King’s brother. Though in the reign of Richard I. it was
part of the demesne lands of Robert de Cardinan Lord of Fowey, who was
returned debtor into the Exchequer, of ten marks due to the King for
having a market at Lestwithiel. _Robertus de Cardinan debet decem
marcas pro habendo Foro apud Lostwithel. Mag. Rot. 6 Ric. I. Rot. 12
a. m. 2, Cornwallia._ However, this town belonged, temp. Hen. III. to
Richard Earl of Cornwall, King Richard’s nephew, upon the death of
whose son Edmund, it became part of the King’s demesne, and anno 7
Edw. III. upon the creation of John Earl of Cornwall, the King’s
brother, he had this borough, _inter alia_, granted him; which was
afterwards assigned to Edward the King’s son, when he was made Duke of
Cornwall, and became, upon his death, the jointure or dowry of Joan
Princess of Wales, his wife; on whose decease, anno 9 Ric. II. the
King granted it to Tho. Holland Earl of Kent, his (half) brother, who
held for life the manors of Lestwithiel and Camelford; he died in the
20th Ric. II. His son Thomas was created Duke of Surrey, and was
beheaded anno 1 Hen. IV.”

Mr. Willis having a little mistaken this, I have thus rectified it.
After the death of which last Thomas, (who also held them for life),
Sir John Cornwall, Lord Fanhope, obtained a grant of the same on
account of marrying Elizabeth, the King’s sister; and obtained a grant
of the same from Henry Prince of Wales to enjoy them during her life;
and afterwards procured it for his own life, and died accordingly
seised thereof in December 1443 (22 Hen. VI.) as may be seen in
Dugdale’s Baronage. The yearly rent of this borough, payable to the
Duke of Cornwall, is in Doddridge’s History of that Duchy, p. 108, set
down at £11. 19_s._ 10½_d._

The town is situated between hills. Boats of ten and twenty tons come
up hither. Here are about 70 houses; and the manor is in the duchy.


THE EDITOR.

Lestwithiel evidently owes its locality to that which determined in
early times the site of all towns placed on the banks of navigable
rivers. They were universally built on the highest point to which
vessels or boats frequenting the estuary were capable of being carried
by the tide.

Richard Plantagenet might well have been captivated by the beauties of
this place and of the surrounding country, by its central situation,
and by the commanding eminence of Restormal. Here the last of our real
feudal princes, whether he originally built or only enlarged the
castle, fixed his court, and collected those revenues with which he is
said to have bought from the venal electors of Germany, the titular
office of King of the Romans; conveying, however, the legal right of
succession to the throne of his grandfather the Emperor Henry the
Fifth.

  Nummus ait pro me, nubit Cornubia Romæ.
     Carew, 204, Lord Dunstanville’s edit.

To Richard King of the Romans Lestwithiel is indebted for the remains
of the palace or stannary buildings, and for its privileges.

The palace, if it was ever the residence of a Prince, has long since
been converted into a prison, with apartments for occasionally holding
the Stannary Courts.

Various charters have been granted to this town. The last was given in
the reign of King George the Second, by which seven permanent Aldermen
annually chose, for one year, seventeen other persons, misnamed
freemen, who altogether formed the select body for electing Members of
Parliament. The validity of this charter has never been contested; but
a doubt can scarcely be entertained of all its being utterly void, at
least as to constituting a Parliamentary grant, on the ground of its
entire variance from the common law of the land: but this question has
now lost its importance in consequence of the Reform enacted in 1832.

The church possesses a character unusual in the west of England, by
having its nave elevated, with a series of windows above the two
ailes. It contains several monuments, and a curious antique font.

The etymology of this town, like that of Leskeard, has suffered from
modern caprice, the Les having been here changed into Los; as Dover,
from some strange fancy, is rapidly passing into Dovor.

No separate measurement has been taken of this parish, not even
co-extensive with the modern town; the site is included in the
parishes adjacent.

  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815            1498   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            398   3    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    743   |    825   |    933   |   1548
    giving an increase of 108 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. John Bower, presented in 1816 by Lord Mount
    Edgcumbe.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Dr. Boase says of the geology of this little parish, that it is
composed of the same schistose rocks as the eastern part of the parish
of Lanlivery.




ST. LEVAN.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

St. Levan is situated in the hundred of Penwith, and is bounded to the
west by the ocean, to the north by Sennon, to the east by St. Burian,
to the south by the mouth of the Channel.

This parish taketh its name from the saint to whom the church is
dedicated, St. Levine.

It is a daughter church of St. Burian, forming part of the deanery of
St. Burian.


THE EDITOR.

St. Levan exceeds perhaps every other parish in the whole county for
bold and romantic scenery.

First it possesses Trereen Dinas.

This magnificent promontory has towards the land one of those ancient
entrenchments which so much distinguish the western coast, from whence
the word dinas. There the point runs out into the sea, rising into a
succession of natural granite towers in spires, and aiguilles, and the
first presenting a perpendicular front, is crowned with the far-famed
Loging Rock.

Without calling in question the religious uses made of this stone in
rude and barbarous times, it may be declared as a certainty to be
entirely natural. Among the thousands of rocks lying scattered in all
directions, some possessing a convex surface have accidentally rested
on the flat surface of another. Many such rocks are known, but this
one transcends in size, and occupies a most commanding station. The
rock has been measured with the greatest care, and it is believed to
weigh about ninety tons, yet any one, by applying his shoulder to the
edge, and favouring the vibrations, can easily cause the stone to log
through a very sensible angle.

Doctor Borlase, in his most learned and ingenious speculations on the
religion and policy of the Druids, paid considerable attention to rock
monuments in general, and especially to this, the most remarkable of
all. In p. 180 of the Antiquities, second edition, Doctor Borlase
says, “In the parish of St. Levan, Cornwall, there is a promontory
called Castle Treryn. This cape consists of three distinct groupes of
rocks. On the western side of the middle groupe, near the top, lies a
very large stone, so evenly poised, that any hand may move it to or
fro; but the extremities of its base are at such a distance from each
other, and so well secured by their nearness to the stone which it
stretches itself upon, that it is morally impossible that any lever,
or indeed force (however applied in a mechanical way) can remove it
from its present situation.”

This rather over-strong expression piqued the vanity of a gallant and
intrepid officer, commanding an armed vessel on the coast, in 1824,
who maintained that nothing could be impossible to the courage and
skill of British seamen, and therefore, attended by ten or twelve of
his men, Lieutenant Goldsmith, nephew of the celebrated novelist and
poet (for it would even be unjust to withhold his name, as connected
with a transaction on the whole redounding to his credit), went on the
eighth of April to the rock, and there, by a continued application of
their united strength, they threw this huge mass into vibrations of
such extent as to cause the convex surface at last to slide from its
horizontal base, most fortunately in the direction opposite to that in
which they stood. The rock was saved from falling to the ground, and
from thence probably into the sea, by a narrow chasm which caught it
in the descent.

Mr. Goldsmith having thus achieved what had been declared impossible
by the highest authority that Cornwall could produce, must have
congratuled himself on such complete success; but the sensations of
all the neighbourhood were entirely at variance from those of the
gallant officer; fears were even entertained for his life; and a
meeting of the Magistrates and principal persons was contemplated, for
the purpose of representing the affair to Government: but the Editor
of this work being then in London, and having the honour of being
known to all the Lords of the Admiralty, he went there, and
representing the exploit that had been performed in the light of an
indiscreet frolic, he proposed that the Admiralty should lend a proper
apparatus, and send it from Plymouth, while he on his part would
endeavour to raise an adequate sum of money; and that Lieutenant
Goldsmith, having thrown down this natural curiosity, should
superintend the putting it up again. The terms were accepted, and
thirteen capstans, with blocks, chains, &c. were sent from the
dock-yard.

The Editor having commenced a contribution of money with twenty-five
pounds, raised it to a hundred and fifty; and on the 2d of November,
in the presence of thousands, amidst ladies waving their
handkerchiefs, men firing _feux-de-joye_, and universal shouts, Mr.
Goldsmith had the satisfaction and the glory of replacing this immense
rock in its natural position, uninjured in its discriminating
properties.

In consequence of the Editor making a second application to the
Admiralty, and of his commencing another contribution of money with
five pounds, Lanyon Cromlech was also replaced by the same apparatus.

The walk of about a mile and a half along the cliffs from Trereen
Dinas to St. Levan Church, is grand and romantic in the highest
degree. Between the two points is inclosed Porth Kernow, where the
water is beautifully transparent, over a fine sand composed in part of
minute shells quite entire, and of various species and genera, to be
collected on the beach. The church itself is in a most sequestered
spot, and said by Mr. Tonkin to be dedicated to St. Levina, who was a
British female, and suffered martyrdom under the Saxons before their
conversion to the Christian faith.

The relics of St. Levine or Lewine were long preserved and honoured at
Seaford, about ten miles from Eastbourn in Sussex, till, in 1058,
eight years before the Norman Conquest, her remains, together with
those of St. Idaberga, another female, and a portion of the relics of
St. Oswald, were carried beyond the seas, and deposited in the abbey
of St. Winock at Bergh in Flanders, amidst a variety of miracles
attested by Drogo, an eye-witness, and published in the great
collection of the Bollandists.

The only object worthy of attention in St. Levan church is a plain
monument to Miss Thomasin Dennis, with the following inscription:

        Thomasin Dennis,
          de Trembath,
   ingenio, suavitate, virtute
            insignis,
      doctrina insignissima.
  Nata xxix die Septembris, 1771,
               væ!
     lenta sed præmatura morte
             erepta
     obiit xxx die Augusti 1809,
        anno ætatis xxxviii.

Miss Dennis was born at Sawah in this parish, the daughter of Mr.
Alexander Dennis, one of the superior class of farmers, who occupy
their own estates held at quit-rents for lives. He afterwards removed
to Trembath in Maddern. Her superior genius displayed itself at a very
early age, in reciting poetry from our best authors, and then in
producing imitations of her own. “She lisped in numbers from her
mother’s arms.” French was acquired with equal accuracy and facility;
and then, observing that her eldest brother appeared to make an
inadequate progress in Latin, occasioned by the entire want of
attention on the part of the schoolmaster at Penzance, this young lady
under eighteen studied a classic language for the mere purpose of
helping forward her brother.

The celebrity which Miss Dennis had now acquired, brought her
acquainted with the Rev. Mr. Hitchins, the learned vicar of St.
Hilary, with the Editor of this work, and with several others, more or
less scholars, from all of whom she received the praises due to her
superior talents, and such instruction or assistance as they could
afford, by lending books, or by indicating the most approved methods
of proceeding; and with such slender help her progress was so great
and almost unexampled, that not only were all the Roman authors soon
read, but the Greek writers followed in a rapid succession, till
Æschylus and Pindar became her familiar acquaintance.

About this time Miss Dennis was induced to accompany Mr. and Mrs.
Josiah Wedgewood from Penzance, chiefly as a friend and a visitor, but
partly also, in return for their civilities and kindness, to overlook
the progress of their son; but her health began to fail, her only
sister fell into a consumption, she returned to nurse her, and died of
the same most pitiable complaint.

  Εν Μακαρεσσι πονων ανταξιος ειη Αμοιβη.

Nothing of her poetry has been given to the public; nor would it now
be fair to print a few trifles. Miss Dennis proved herself adequate to
the composition of any work in prose, by publishing in 1806, at Mr.
Johnson’s in St. Paul’s Churchyard, “Sophia St. Clare,” in name indeed
a novel, but far superior in style of writing and in correctness of
sentiment, to the fictions of the day. From the want of incident,
however, similar to those which are characterized in the drama by
producing stage effect, the work failed of becoming popular.

This parish, after Trereen Dinas, is distinguished by the possession
of Tol-Peder-Penwith, about a mile westward from the church, the
approach to which lies under romantic cliffs, and crosses a short deep
vale, where boats are sheltered in a small cove apparently
inaccessible to human art or daring. At the very extremity of the
point an excavation has been made by the sea, of some portion less
compacted than the remainder of the rock, probably of a lode, which
opens to the surface in the form of an inverted cone. This place is
very dangerous of access, on account of the steep descent covered by a
slippery turf; but strangers are tempted to risk their lives in
approaching the abyss, by the dashing of the waves within it, and by
the tremendous roar of the sea. Two gentlemen from London were induced
to enter the cavern leading from the sea, and were surrounded by the
tide. One, who excelled in swimming, fortunately got out and
communicated the perilous situation of his companion to a neighbouring
farmer, who hastened with assistance and with ropes to the spot, and
succeeded in lifting him to the surface through the cone. Nor must the
circumstance be omitted, that, although the stranger was possessed of
a very large fortune, he could not prevail on his rescuer to accept
of the least pecuniary reward for preserving the life of a
fellow-creature.

The villages in this parish are of small importance. Bosistow belonged
in remote times to a family of the same name, giving for their arms
Azure, three escallops Vaire. Mr. Bosistow, now residing at Tredreath
in Lelant, is believed to represent this ancient family. In more
recent times Bosistow belonged to the Davieses.

All the farms in this parish have been constantly occupied either by
the freeholders or by persons possessing leaseholds, paying
quit-rents, for lives; in consequence, they have taken extreme care
against making parishioners, and in managing their Poor Rate, as will
appear from its small amount.

The parish feast is kept on the nearest Sunday to October the 10th.

  St. Levan measures 2079 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as         £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815            2063    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                             94    4    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    400   |    434   |    490   |    515
    giving an increase of 29 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish is entirely situated on granite, which in many places
furnishes a good and fertile soil, as has been observed in the
adjoining parish of St. Burian. Its fine sea cliffs exhibit many
varieties of the granite, and distinctly show the manner of
arrangement in the more common and larger masses. To enter on the
details of this subject, would occupy too much space. The geologist
will find ample amusement along the whole line of these cliffs, which
are always viewed by the romantic tourist with great delight. Besides
the elevation and grand contour of the cliffs, here will be found the
celebrated Logan Rock at Trereen, and the Tunnel Rock at
Tol-Peder-Penwith.


THE EDITOR.

It may be observed, that I have always used the words Log-ing Rock,
for the celebrated stone at Trereen Dinas. Much learned research seems
to have been idly expended on the supposed name, “Logan Rock.” To log,
is a verb in general use throughout Cornwall, for vibrating or rolling
like a drunken man; and _an_ is frequently heard in provincial
pronunciation for _ing_, characteristic of the modern present
participle. The Loging Rock is therefore strictly descriptive of its
peculiar motion.




LEWANNICK.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lewannick is in the hundred of East, and hath to the west and north
Alternun, to the east South Pederwin, to the south North Hill.

The right name of this parish is Lanwennock; and it is dedicated to
the same Wennack as Landewednack. It is a vicarage valued in the
King’s Books at £7. 18_s._ 2_d._ The patronage in the Crown.

This is but a poor parish, and hath not many noted places in it. The
most considerable is the manor of Trelask, Trelask, that is the burnt
town, from such an accident I suppose happening there.

I take this to be the most ancient seat of the Lowers in this county;
who in the last century were a flourishing family, divided into
several branches, though now the females have carried off the estates
into other families, and there are very few of the males remaining.

On the death of Edward Roper, Esq. this manor fell to ―――― Plowden,
Esq. descended from the famous lawyer of that name, who is the present
lord of it.


THE EDITOR.

The parish church is distinguished by some remains of Gothic
ornaments, and by its lofty tower. Within the church are some recent
monuments to the Archers of Trelask, and one to the Rev. W. A. Morgan,
the late vicar. There are also several ancient monuments, but greatly
defaced.

The villages in this parish are small, and the houses are generally
constructed of the least durable materials. The principal are Hick’s
Mill, Pollyfont, Trenhorne, and Trevadlack.

The manor of Trelaske, having originally belonged to a family of the
same name, came to the Uptons. It is stated by Mr. Lysons that two
co-heiresses of the Upton family married two brothers of the Lowers,
between whom the property was divided. One half passed to the family
of Plowden; and the other half was sold by Thomas Lower, Esq. who died
in 1703, to John Addis, Esq. whose son purchased the share of William
Plowden and others. In 1741, William Addis, Esq. bequeathed the whole
to Nicholas Swete Archer, Esq. in whose collateral heirs it still
remains. Trelaske is a handsome gentleman’s seat, and surrounded by
extensive woods. Mr. Nicholas Swete Archer married a sister of the
late Mr. Francis Basset, of Tehidy, and resided chiefly at Truro in a
house the property of Mr. Enys, of Enys, who had married another
sister of Mr. Francis Basset; this gentleman dying without children,
left Trelaske to his nephew, whose son greatly improved the house and
the place; but has recently been taken out of this life at an early
age, leaving a numerous family amply provided with the gifts of
fortune, and consoled by the recollection of a parent universally
respected and esteemed.

The manor of Tinney Hall belonged to the family of Beaumont; the last
possessor of that name, Mrs. Dorothy Beaumont, bequeathed it to her
nephew Mr. John Speccot, of Penheal, from whom it passed to his
relation Mr. Thomas Long (see Egloskerry), and the manor now belongs
to his heir-at-law the Rev. Charles Sweet.

The etymology given by Mr. Tonkin for Trelaske does not seem to be
very probable. The verb Losgi is in Cornish to burn; but it does not
approach nearly to the sound of laske, and the derivation has not any
support from tradition at this place, nor in Cubert, nor in Pelynt,
where the name occurs.

The manor of Pollyfont was heretofore a parcel of the priory of
Minster near Botreaux Castle[1], and has been annexed to the rectory
of Minster parish. Some remains of a chapel are still to be seen at
this place.

The great tithes belonged to the family of Gedy or Giddy, of
Trebersey, from whom they descended to Mr. John Eliot, heir-at-law of
the celebrated patriot Sir John Eliot, who married the heiress of that
family; and they were by him devised, with the whole of his property,
to Mr. William Eliot, second brother of Lord Eliot, of Port Eliot, now
Lord St. Germans, who has parted with them to Mr. William Hocker, of
Trewanta in this parish.

  Lewanick measures 3,516 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3773    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           431    8    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831.
              {    548   |    563   |    623   |    643
    giving an increase of 17 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The geology of this parish is similar to that of Alternun; this
parish, however, merely touches the granite on its western corner,
whilst the latter is situated on that rock through a considerable
extent.


     [1] See Carew, p. 125. Lord de Dunstanville’s edition.




LEZANT.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lezant is in the hundred of East, and hath to the west Lewannick and
Linkinhorne, to the north South Pederwin and Lawhitton, to the east
the river Tamar, to the south Stoke Climsland.

Lezant is an abbreviation of Lansant, the Holy Church, and so it is
written in the Taxatio Beneficiorum; so called, perhaps, as being
dedicated to All the Saints: so that Lezant may signify the same as
All Hallows.

It is a rectory, valued in the King’s Books at £32. The patron is the
Bishop of Exeter. The incumbent is the Rev. Mr. John Grant, Rector
likewise of Ruan Lanyhorne, Canon of Exeter, and son-in-law to the
present Bishop, Dr. Stephen Weston.

The first place of note that offers itself in this parish, is the
manor of Trecarell, which gave name to an eminent family, seated here
(as it is said) before the Norman Conquest, who gave for their arms,
Ermine, two chevrons Sable.

Next, Landew, the black inclosure; aptly enough (in my opinion) so
called, as being under a dismal hill.

This place was for several descents the seat of a younger branch of
the family of Trefusis: the last of which, Nicholas Trefusis, of this
place, was chosen Knight for this county in Parliament, to succeed Sir
Bevil Granville, as Mr. Hugh Boscawen, of Tregothnan, was to succeed
Sir Alexander Carew; both which knights fell for the King’s cause in
1643 and 1644, the first by the sword, at the battle of Lansdowne, the
other by the axe, on Tower Hill. The said Nicholas Trefusis had by his
wife two daughters and coheirs: Mary, married in her father’s lifetime
to Edward Herle, of Prideaux, Esq. and Catherine, married after his
death to Richard Kelliow, Esq.

Mr. Trefusis, by his will, bearing date August 13, 1647, settled
(inter alia) this barton, with its appurtenances, called his barton
and demesnes of Landew and Dinham’s land, with the Almes Pool Meadow,
and Greston Moor, on the said Mr. Herle and Mary his wife, and their
heirs for ever.

Mr. Herle settled in this place his eldest son, who new-built the
house here, but did not live to finish it, for he died in his father’s
lifetime, leaving by his wife two sons, Edward and Nicholas, and
several daughters.

Edward Herle, Esq. seated himself and family here, was Sheriff of
Cornwall in the 12th year of Ann, 1713; and was a Member in the last
Parliament for the town of Launceston. A gentleman of bright parts, a
lovely aspect, and admired and esteemed by all that had the happiness
to know him,――I may say by all that ever heard of his name and
character; but being miserably tormented by the gout, so as to be a
perfect cripple with it, he died in the best of his time, at this
place; leaving by his wife, the daughter of ―――― Northmore, of
Oakhampton, in Devon, Esq. Northmore Herle, Esq. who is now about
twenty years of age. His mother is since married again to Charles
Kendall, M.D. second son to Archdeacon Kendall, of Killigarth, who has
left her a widow, for the second time, with five daughters.

Since the above was written, Northmore Herle, Esq. has died at Oxford,
unmarried, in May 1737, in the 22d year of his age.


THE EDITOR.

This parish seems to be inserted among others belonging to the hundred
of East, in the valuation of Pope Nicholas, under the name Ecclesia de
Sacre, and valued at £5.

Trecarrell, but slightly noticed by Mr. Tonkin, appears to have been a
place of considerable consequence. The last of the original family
bearing the same name, was living there in the year 1540, when, having
lost his only son, Sir Henry Trecarrell built the beautiful church at
Launceston. On this gentleman’s decease, the property became divided
among his three daughters; but at the period of the Civil Wars
Trecarrell had passed into other hands, and Mr. Maneton, then
proprietor, entertained King Charles the First, on the 1st day of
August 1644, previously to his proceeding to Leskeard, and from thence
to the surrender of the army commanded by Lord Essex. Mr. Maneton died
in 1654, since which time it has ceased to be a mansion. The property
is now vested in Sir Thomas Acland, and Mr. Geake who resides on the
place, where some portions of the ancient building are still to be
seen, especially the remains of a hall, and of a chapel dedicated to
St. Mary Magdalen.

Landew also bestowed a name on its ancient proprietors, or received it
from them; two of whom occur in the list of Members returned to
Parliament for Launceston.

Mr. Tonkin has mentioned the early death of Mr. Northmore Herle: this
gentleman devised Landew to one of his half-sisters, daughter of Dr.
Kendall, from whom it descended to the late Mr. Humphry Lawrence, of
Launceston, who sold it to Mr. William Bant. But the place has been
sold again, and is now the residence of John Thomas Phillipps, Esq.
representative, with Mr. Carpenter of Mount Tavy, of the Phillippses
of Newport and Camelford.

Landew had formerly a chapel dedicated to St. Bridget; and there was a
third in the parish, dedicated to St. Lawrence.

Carthamartha, a part of the great manor of Lawhitton, leased by Bishop
Lavington to his daughter, is the occasional residence of Mr. John
Gould, a place beautifully situated on the banks of the Tamar river,
the most romantic of all the mountain torrents in the West of England.

The church and tower are of granite; and in it are several monuments
to the eminent possessors of Trecarrell and of Landew.

There is also one to the Rev. Charles Mayson, D.D. late Rector of
Lezant, and who is stated to have succeeded his father, the Rev. Peter
Mayson, in 1784, and to have died here in 1815.

  Lezant measures 4357 statute acres.

  Annual value of the Real Property, as     £.    _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815         3303    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                         613   19    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    610   |    671   |    853   |    841
    giving an increase of 38 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. John Bull, D.D. Canon of Christ Church.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Dr. Boase says of the geology of this parish, that the rocks and the
substrata belong entirely to the calcareous series, and resemble those
of Lawhitton.




LINKINHORNE.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Linkinhorne is in the hundred of East, and hath to the west St. Clair,
to the north North Hill and Lezant, to the east Stoke Climsland, to
the south South Hill and St. Eve.

The right name of this parish is Lankinhorne, which signifies,
according to the proper meaning of the words, a church of iron, or of
singular iron, but how applicable to this doth not appear to me.

This is a vicarage valued in the King’s book at £13. The patronage in
John Hicks, of Trenedick, Esq. the sheaf in James Tilly, of Pentilly,
Esq. and William Clobery, of Bradstone, in Devon, Esq.; the incumbent
Mr. George Jeffery.

I shall, according to my usual method, begin with the most westerly
estate in it, having first of all premised that in the 19 Edward I.
anno 1291, this Church being valued for Pope Nicholas, by the name of
Ecclesia de Lankynheon, was rated, the rectory at £4. 6_s._ 8_d._, the
vicarage at £2. 13_s._ 4_d._ with a payment to the Prior of Launceston
of £1. 6_s._ 8_d._


THE MANOR OF CARNEDON PRIOR.――THE ROCKY HILL.

In Domesday Book is a manor called Carneten, which I believe to be
this. And if so, it was one of the manors given by William the
Conqueror to Robert Earl of Morton, when he made him Earl of Cornwall.


THE EDITOR.

The manors of Millaton and Carnadon Prior belong to the Duchy of
Cornwall; the latter had belonged to the Priory of Launceston, and is
one of the manors given in exchange by King Henry the Eighth for the
honour of Wallingford.

On the waste of this manor stands the lofty hill usually called
Carraton Downs, supposed, with the exception of Brown Willy (which is
elevated 1368 feet above the sea) to be the highest land in Cornwall.
Here King Charles the First drew up his forces on the 2d of August,
1644, and was joined by Prince Maurice.

The manor of Trefrize or Trefy is said to have belonged, at a remote
period, to the family of Trefey. It belonged to Sir Henry Trecarrell,
of Trecarrell, in Lezant, and became split among his daughters. It is
now again united in the family of Vyvyan, of Trelowarren. Some
accounts represent this place as having been very magnificent, and the
residence of a Lord (qu. Laird?) Trefey.

In this parish are several elevated points of land covered with
granite or other crystaline rocks in the most magnificent groups, and
commanding extensive prospects, first over this rugged ground, then
across the Tamar, and its fertile vale, with Hamoaze, Plymouth, and
the Sound, having the whole bounded by the mountains of Dartmoor.

Among the most remarkable of those points or carnes are Sharp or
Sharpy Tor, the Cheese Wring, and the Hurlers. But for a minute and
accurate description of the whole district, the Editor would again
refer, as he has done under St. Clair, to “Topographical and
Historical Sketches of the Borough of East and West Looe, and of the
neighbourhood. By Thomas Bond, Esq. 1 vol. 8vo. 1823, printed for J.
Nichols and Son, Parliament Street, Westminster.”

The church having fallen into decay was rebuilt by the munificent
founder of Launceston Church, Sir Henry Trecarrell: it contains
several monuments.

  Linkinhorne parish measures 7292 statute acres.
  Value of the Real Property, as returned      £.   _s._ _d._
    to Parliament in 1815                    5643    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           886    0    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    924   |   1002   |   1080   |   1159
    giving an increase of somewhat more than 25 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The geological structure of this parish is similar to that of St.
Clear. Its western part rests on granite, forming high and barren
hills, the sides and summits of which are covered with boulders and
tors. Of the latter the most interesting is the celebrated Cheese
Wring. Its eastern part consists of massive and schistose varieties of
felspar rocks and green stone.




LUDGVEN, or LUDGEAN.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Ludgian is situated in the hundred of Penwith, and hath to the west
Maddern, to the north Lelant and Towedneck, to the east St. Erth and
St. Hilary, to the south Gulval and the Mount’s Bay.

Mr. Gwavas derives the name from Lug Var, the high or hilly placed
tower. To which the situation of this church does very well agree.

This is a rectory valued in the King’s book at £30. 11_s._ 6_d._ The
patronage in the Duke of Bolton.

At the Taxation of Pope Nicholas, in 1291, this church is valued at £7
a year, having never been appropriated; and it is there called
Ecclesia de Ludewon.

The chief place in this parish, on which stands the church, is the
manor of Ludgian Lease, that is, Ludgian place, or inclosed land. In
Domesday Book it is called Ludaham, being one of the manors given by
William the Conqueror to his half-brother, Robert Earl of Morton.


THE EDITOR.

The manor of Ludgean Lease has been of great consequence and extent.
It still spreads over lands in several parishes; and holds as
appendages the advowson to the rectory of this parish, and the high
lordship of St. Ives, where certain honorary perquisites are paid to
the lord of this manor for ships entering the port; and moreover, on
the day of holding the annual court, the corporation maces are borne
before the steward. Mr. Lysons states that the manor was given by
Richard Earl of Cornwall to the family of Ferrers; from whom it
passed, by successive female heirs, to those of Champernown and
Willoughby (Lord Broke), and from a coheiress of the latter to the
family of Paulet; and it now belongs to the two daughters, or their
descendants, of Henry Paulet, last Duke of Bolton, who died in 1794.

Treassow has been for a considerable time the seat of the family of
Rogers, since removed to Penrose, in the neighbourhood of Helston, in
consequence of a large fortune acquired there by Mr. John Rogers, as
steward to the Godolphins.

Annexed to Treassow is Castle-an-Dinas, the most lofty hill in that
whole district, and the one standing furthest towards the south. It
differs, however, from all the other hills thereabout in the quality
of its material; for, although the whole is granite, not a rock is to
be seen, and at its north-western base works are carried on, similar
to those near St. Austell for preparing china-clay. On the top of the
hill a considerable part remains of the extensive dinas, entrenchment,
or castle, that has given the name, reduplicated in modern times, from
an entire forgetfulness of the Celtic language.

Borlase gives the following description of these remains:

     “Castle-an-Dinas consisted of two stone walls, one within
     the other, in a circular form, surrounding the area of the
     hill. The ruins are now fallen on each side of the walls,
     and show the work to have been of great height and
     thickness. There was also a third, or outer wall, built more
     than halfway round. Within the walls are many little
     inclosures of a circular form, about seven yards diameter,
     with little walls round them of two or three feet high; they
     appear to have been so many huts for the shelter of the
     garrison. The diameter of the whole fort from east to west
     is four hundred feet, and the principal ditch sixty feet.
     Towards the south, the sides of the hill are marked by two
     large green paths, about ten feet wide. Near the middle of
     the area is a well, almost choked up with its own ruins, and
     at a little distance a narrow pit, its sides walled round,
     probably for water also, now filled up.”

On this account the following remarks have been made by a recent
intelligent writer:[2]

     “It is to be regretted that Borlase did not publish a plan
     to illustrate his description of this Castle, as it has been
     much dilapidated since his time. A tower was built on the
     site of the outer wall about forty years ago, by Mr. Rogers,
     of Penrose; and subsequent reparations have not contributed
     towards a restoration of the old walls. Nor are there any
     perceptible remains of the inclosures, two or three feet
     high, which formed the huts for the shelter of the garrison;
     but in this respect, Borlase’s description exactly
     corresponds with the remains I observed within the area of
     Chûn-Castle, as already mentioned. I could discover no
     traces of the ancient entrance, nor does Borlase notice it;
     if it was towards the west, as at Chûn-Castle, it has been
     blocked up, for the walls on that side seem to have been
     rebuilt or repaired; if on the southern side, where, Borlase
     says, there were two broad paths leading up the side of the
     hill, towards the Castle, it has been totally destroyed.

     “I now proceed to a description of this ancient and curious
     fortress. The first inclosure is a mound of earth alone,
     seven or eight feet high, surrounded by a ditch. Within
     this, a second fosse, or ditch, encircled the _outer wall_,
     which was built as before described, and is about five feet
     in thickness, and four or five high, excepting towards the
     south-east, where it has been destroyed, and the materials
     used in building the tower before mentioned.

     “A vallum, or terrace, separates this wall from another of
     considerable strength and thickness, being thirteen feet
     across at the top. The circular area inclosed by this wall
     is two hundred and fifty-four feet in diameter. A third
     wall, of no great substance or height, like the others,
     appears to have made a circuit within this space, and
     reduced the diameter to one hundred and ninety feet. But
     what is most curious in this Castle, is the appearance of a
     certain wavy outline, slightly raised above the natural
     soil, but overgrown with turf. The singular form of these
     foundations, if they are supposed to be the inclosures
     noticed by Borlase, and their exact regularity, which I took
     some pains to ascertain, is perhaps deserving the attention
     of some more experienced antiquary.

     “The area within is very uneven, and has, nearly in the
     centre, a small round inclosure, twenty-two feet in
     diameter, without an entrance. It is exactly similar in its
     construction to the remains in Caër-Brane and Bartìnè
     Castles. There is a well also within the circuit of the
     walls, and we were told it was never known to be without
     water. The diameter of the whole work, from ditch to ditch,
     north and south, is four hundred and thirty-six feet.”

Rosevithney was for ages a gentleman’s residence. The family of Larmer
possessed it during a considerable time, till it passed by an heiress
to a branch of the Davieses. The freehold has recently been sold three
or four times.

Trowell, an adjoining farm, which belonged to the Godolphins, is
remarkable for the extremely productive copper-mine, called Whele
Fortune, which first launched Mr. Lemon on his splendid voyage through
life.

The name of another farm in Ludgean, which cannot be accidental,
requires notice. On this farm was a well, now destroyed by mines,
having, in all probability, some slight quality of a chalybeate. The
water acquired an established reputation for the relief of weak sight,
and hundreds repaired there every year to bathe their eyes. The farm
is named Collurian, and has been so time out of mind.

Varfull has been held as a leasehold for lives, or under copy of court
roll, for more than a century, by the family of Davy, and actually
belonged to Sir Humphry Davy, whose name has reflected so much honour,
not on Cornwall alone, but on the whole nation to which he belonged.

The church, with the church town and the rectory, are placed in a
commanding situation, and being surrounded by trees, make one of the
most pleasing objects in the Mount’s Bay. The house has been entirely
rebuilt by the late rector Mr. John Stephens. The tower is one of the
most correct in its proportions and in its ornaments of any in the
west of Cornwall. About the year 1761, a pinnacle was thrown down by
lightning, and the effect was then universally imputed to the
vengeance of a perturbed spirit exorcised from Treassow, and passing
eastward towards the usual place of banishment in the Red Sea.

A more ancient legend is also connected with this church. After St.
Ludgvan, an Irish missionary, if such a one ever existed, had
constructed the fabric, he brought a stream of water under the church
stile, with the intention of bestowing on the water various miraculous
powers; among others, that of enabling every infant sprinkled with it
at the baptismal font, instantly to acquire the power of making all
the responses in distinct words, and probably in the Latin tongue;
but, being interrupted by some unhallowed interference, his general
purposes were defeated, so that one alone of the many intended
qualities could by possibility be conferred; a qaality very different
from the former, but so much esteemed by some descriptions of persons,
that, within times of memory, children are reported to have been
brought there for baptism, to acquire the protection afforded by this
consecrated stream, which, after washing away the stain of original
sin, does not indeed effectually guard the infant against committing
crimes of his own, but against ever expiating them through the medium
of an hempen cord; and experience is said to have proved that the
charm does not extend to one of silk.

But the church of Ludgvan is not driven to seek renown from ancient
missionaries or from legendary saints: during fifty years of the
eighteenth century, it had for its rector Dr. William Borlase, a man
of whom Cornwall will ever have reason to be proud.

At a time when the very names of natural science were scarcely heard
among us, and when our mining and metallurgic processes were matters
merely empiric, Dr. Borlase kindled the first spark of light, and
fanned it by long-continued and able exertions, guided by a
correspondence with persons the most distinguished on the continent of
Europe, as well as at home, with the great Linnæus, and with
Boerhaave, in some departments superior even to Linnæus himself. When
no communications were maintained by the rapid circulation of
periodical journals, antiquities, as connected with classical
acquirements, had proceeded much further than the sciences dependent
on mathematics and on natural philosophy. Dr. Borlase, in a most
learned work, essayed to trace the learning, the mythology, and the
civil institutions of the Celtic people, the earliest inhabitants of
Britain, and especially of their priests the Druids; and with such
success, that it established his high reputation for learning, for
extensive research, and for discriminating judgment, throughout the
literary world, where the subject, from its general nature, excited
universal attention. For this work the degree of Doctor in Civil Law
by diploma was conferred on him by the University of Oxford; an honour
bestowed with so much discrimination and regard to its high value,
that the next instance occurs in the case of Dr. Johnson, about ten
years afterwards.

       *     *     *     *     *

The following document has been copied by the Editor from the official
Register at Oxford, and it is inserted as a record at once honourable
to Dr. Borlase and to the University:

     “Mr. Vice-Chancellor and Gentlemen,

     “Whereas I have been informed that it is proposed among you
     to confer the degree of Doctor in Civil Law by diploma upon
     the Reverend William Borlase, Master of Arts, formerly of
     Exeter College, and now Rector of Ludgvan in Cornwall, whose
     abilities as a scholar are sufficiently known to the public
     by his learned and valuable work, entitled ‘The Natural
     History and Antiquities of Cornwall;’ and also having heard
     that he has been a considerable benefactor to the University
     by presenting to the Ashmolean Museum a curious collection
     of ores, crystals, and other specimens of natural subjects,
     I give my full consent that he should receive the proposed
     testimony of your approbation, and am, Mr. Vice-Chancellor
     and Gentlemen,

                Your affectionate friend and servant,
                                                LITCHFIELD.

     “_Hill Street, March 8, 1766._”

     “Lectis hisce literis et approbatis, diploma tenoris
     sequentis per registrarium lectum erat, et ex decreto
     venerabilis domus in proxima congregatione communi
     Universitatis sigillo muniendum.

     “Cancellarius, Magistri, et Scholares Universitatis
     Oxoniensis omnibus ad quos præsens scriptum pervenerit,
     salutem in Domino sempiternam.

     “Cum a majoribus nostris eo consilio gradus academici
     instituti fuerint, ut eximia virorum eruditorum studia digno
     præconio honestarent, aliisque imitanda proponerent;

     “Nos Cancellarius, Magistri, et Scholares Universitatis
     Oxoniensis, summa cum voluptate, viri Reverendi Gulielmi
     Borlase, ecclesiæ de Ludgvan in comitatu Cornubiæ rectoris,
     et olim e collegio Exoniensi Artium Magistri, scripta
     pervolventes, queis natalis sui soli res cum naturales tum
     antiquas descripsit, magnoque sumptu et labore diutino in
     lucem edidit; nec inter ea immemores benevolentiæ suæ et
     pietatis in Matrem Academicam singularis, quâ varia quæ sibi
     occurrebat, mineralium, metallorum, et vetustissimi ævi
     reliquiarum supellectili, Museum nostrum Ashmoleanum
     locupletavit, quo viro tantum de nobis et republica
     literarum merito debitus constet honos, (quique etiam non
     minus ecclesiam sacerdos, quam patriam ornat philosophus,)
     in frequenti academicorum senatu decrevimus eundem Gulielmum
     Borlase, gradu Doctoris in Jure Civili, omnibusque quæ ad
     talem dignitatem pertinent privilegiis, insignire. In cujus
     rei testimonium sigillum Universitatis commune, quo in hoc
     casu utimur, præsentibus apponi fecimus.

     “Datum in domo nostra convocationis die decimo-tertio mensis
     Martii, anno Domini millessimo septingentessimo sexagessimo
     sexto.”

Not having been born sufficiently early even to see this highly
distinguished person, I am induced to copy the following short notices
from a well-known Biographical Dictionary, with a few trifling
alterations:

The Rev. William Borlase, LL.D. a very ingenious and learned writer,
was of an ancient family in Cornwall, and born at Pendeen in the
parish of St. Just, February 2d, 1695-6. His father had represented
St. Ives in Parliament.

Mr. Borlase received the early part of his education at Penzance, but
in 1709 removed to Plymouth. In March 1712-13 he became a member of
Exeter College; and in June 1719, took his degree of Master of Arts.
In 1720 he was ordained priest, and in 1722 he received institution to
the rectory of Ludgvan in Cornwall. In 1732 the Lord Chancellor King
presented him to the vicarage of St. Just, his native parish, the only
preferments he ever obtained.

In the parishes of Ludgvan and St. Just were at that time rich mines
of copper and of tin, abounding with a great variety of curious
minerals. These he collected, and from that pursuit was led to study
at large the natural history of this most interesting county.

The numerous monuments of remote antiquity scattered over the hills
and promontories of Cornwall, made also deep impressions on his mind,
and he availed himself of every resource placed within his reach, by
previous learning and erudition, to acquire a knowledge of the
Druidical learning, and of the manners and customs of the ancient
Britons previously to their becoming Christians. In 1750 he was
elected a Fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1753 published in a
folio volume, at Oxford, “The Antiquities of Cornwall.” A second
edition in the same form came out at London in the year 1769, with
considerable additions, under the following title: “Antiquities,
Historical and Monumental, of the County of Cornwall, consisting of
several Essays on the ancient Inhabitants, Druid Superstition,
Customs, and Remains of the most remote Antiquity in Britain and the
British Isles; exemplified and proved by Monuments now extant in
Cornwall and the Scilly Islands: with a Vocabulary of the
Cornu-British language. Revised, with several additions, by the
Author.”

His next publication had for its title, “Observations on the ancient
and present state of the Islands of Scilly, and their importance to
the Trade of Great Britain,” Oxford, 1756, 4to. This work was an
extension of a paper, read before the Royal Society in 1753.

In 1758 came out his “Natural History of Cornwall, with Engravings of
all the specimens, both animate and mineral, deemed to be of curiosity
or of importance,” printed also at Oxford, in one volume folio, the
original specimens and many antiquities being deposited in the
Ashmolean Museum.

All these works, executed with great ability, patient diligence, and
skill, raised the reputation of the author so high throughout the
learned world, that in March 1766, the University of Oxford conferred
on him their highest honour, the degree of Doctor by diploma, which he
lived to enjoy somewhat more than six years, having departed this life
on the 31st of August, 1772.

Besides his literary correspondence with various learned men, he
carried on one of peculiar frequency with the great poet of his age,
Mr. Alexander Pope, and a large collection of Mr. Pope’s letters to
him is still extant, with a variety of other papers, obviously
intended for publication.

Dr. Borlase furnished Mr. Pope with many Cornish fossils to decorate
his celebrated grotto at Twickenham, where the donor’s name was scored
in capitals of the most splendid materials; and in a letter written on
the occasion, Mr. Pope says, “I am much obliged to you for your
valuable collection of Cornish diamonds. I have placed them where they
may best represent yourself, in a shade, but shining.”

The Royal Society is indebted to Dr. Borlase for about twenty
different communications, and in addition to all these labours, he for
several years undertook the care of some private pupils, and had
together under his roof the heirs of the principal families in the
neighbourhood, Hawkins, St. Aubyn, and Vyvyan.

A plain stone has been laid over his remains in Ludgven Church, with
an inscription rendered almost illegible in the short period of sixty
years.

The monument of some distinguished person bears an inscription ending
with these words:

  Commemorat hæc tabula
  brevi et ipsa interitura.

But we may console ourselves with a better reflection,――

Ανδρων γαρ επιφανων πασα Γη Ταφος, και ου Στηλων μονον εν τῃ οικειᾳ
σημαινει επιγραφη, αλλα και εν τῃ μη προσηκουσῃ αγραφος μνημη παρ’
εκαστῳ της γνωμης μαλλον η του εργου ενδιαιταται.

Dr. William Borlase left two sons, one a Fellow of All Souls College,
and subsequently presented to the University living of South Tetherwin
near Launceston. He married Miss Alice Dewen of Marazion, but died
without a family.

The other son was rector of St. Mewan, and his grandson is now in
possession of the family estates, not one of the numerous sons of Dr.
Walter Borlase having left a male heir.

Since the decease of Dr. William Borlase, two permanent rectors have
alone held the church up to the last year 1834, Mr. Herbert Praed,
second son of Mr. Humphry Mackworth Praed of Trevethow, and Mr. John
Stephens of Tregenna; but their relative situations, in regard to the
individuals possessing the right of presentation, have induced many to
conjecture that this power may have been exercised from considerations
not strictly conformable to those in contemplation when advowsons were
entrusted to private hands. Mr. Stephens is succeeded by the Rev.
Henry Elliot Graham; a relation or connection of the gentleman now
representing the Powlet family.

The chief proprietor of land in this parish is the Rev. John Rogers of
Penrose, canon residentiary of Exeter. Mr. Gregar of Trewarthenick has
also some farms; and as leasehold proprietors, the family of Curnow
have been ancient residents.

The parish feast is kept on the nearest Sunday to St. Paul’s Day,
January 25.

  This parish measures 3941 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           5755    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           561    3    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    1324  |    1491  |     1839   |   2322
    giving an increase of 75 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The northern corner of this parish is situated on granite, resembling
that of Gulval in every respect, except as to one variety abounding in
mica. Much of this stone may be seen in the more ancient houses at
Penzance. The spot, however, from whence this stone was procured, is
no longer known. A difference of opinion is indeed entertained as to
whether it was gotten from blocks near the surface, or from a bed that
has been exhausted; but all are agreed as to the district from whence
it came; and it is universally known by the name of Ludgvan stone. The
property of cleaving evenly into regular blocks, eminently possessed
by this species of granite, makes it valuable for building purposes;
and this property is clearly derived from the even arrangement of the
scale of mica in which it abounds.

Between the granite and the sea-shore a considerable portion of the
schistose rocks is covered by a marsh, and by banks of sand. These
rocks are made up of compact felspar, sometimes nearly pure, at others
intimately united with hornblend or actynolite; they are traversed by
courses or dykes of felspar porphyry, as may be seen on the sea-shore.


     [2] Extracted from an “Account of certain Hill Castles, near
     the Land’s End in Cornwall,” by William Cotton, Esq. F.S.A.
     printed in the Archæologia, vol. XXII. where a plan and
     section of Castle-an-Dinas will be found, taken with greater
     care than that in Lysons’s Cornwall. In the Gentleman’s
     Magazine, LXXII. p. 393, are engravings of two stone weights
     found within the inner circle of this fortress. The weight
     of one was seventeen pounds and a half; and that of the
     other three pounds one ounce.




LUXILIAN, or LUXULIAN.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Luxilian is in the hundred of Powder, and hath to the west St. Roche
and St. Anstell, to the north Lanivet, to the east Lanlivery, to the
south St. Blasey and Tywardreth.

The right name of this parish is Lan Julian, the church of Saint
Julian; but although the church was originally dedicated to him, it
has since changed its patron, and belongs to St. Ayre.

It is a vicarage, valued in the King’s books at 10_l._ The patronage
in Sir Nicholas Trevanion and Mrs. Carverth, now married to Mr. Cole,
the present incumbent, whose father was incumbent before him. This
church was valued, if at all in the taxation of Pope Nicholas,
together with that of Lanlivery, both being then appropriated to the
priory of Tywardreth.

I shall begin with the principal as well as the most westerly estate
in it,


THE MANOR OF PRIDEAUX.

This some would derive from a French original, as being pres d’eaux,
near the waters; for that the sea formerly flowed up as high as this
place, till the stream works choaked up its entrance, any one that
views the high cliffs under this place, and those on the opposite side
of the valley in Tywardreath, must needs be convinced of. And this
leads me to another etymology for it, and as suitable to its
situation, from Pir or Prid, clay, and Aus, the same with Als, the
cliff or sea-shore.

But be this how it will, Prideaux Castle herein was for several ages
(probably before the Norman Conquest) the seat of, and gave name to a
family which hath been very eminent both in this county and in
Devonshire, and still flourisheth in both. Thomas de Prideaux
represented this county in the Parliament 26 Edward I. and Roger de
Prideaux was Sheriff of Cornwall 15 Edward III. His father Dominus
Thomas Prideaux de Prideaux, was one of those who had in the 25th of
Edward I. 20_l._ per annum or more, in lands or rents in this county,
which he held by knight’s service. This family gave for their arms,
Party per pale Azure and Gules, three castles Counterchanged; which
arms are now quartered by Mr. Prideaux of Padstow, who is descended,
as well as all of the name, from younger branches of the family
residing here.


THE EDITOR.

There does not seem to be any thing connected with the remaining
property of this parish that is important or curious. The chief
landholders are the Rashleigh family, and Mrs. Agar, representative of
the Robertses.

Mr. Coleman Rashleigh, son of Mr. John Rashleigh of Penquite, a
younger brother from Menabilly, has purchased Prideaux, built there an
excellent modern house, and restored the place, although in a
different style, to its ancient splendour. This gentleman has
distinguished himself as one of the most active, most able, and most
energetic among those who have supported in Cornwall the theories
leading to recent organic change in the system of our representation,
and he has been created a Baronet by the Reform administration.

The church is situated on very lofty ground, amidst granite rocks, so
universally scattered over the surface, that many houses are built in
such a manner as to make one or more of these rocks available in the
walls. Yet the soil is good; and Mr. Grylls, the present vicar, has
proved that taste and perseverance may create an elegant assemblage of
whatever is useful or ornamental in a situation apparently the most
unpromising. The tower as well as the church far exceed the average in
size and beauty. The tower has a singular addition of a small room at
the top; and in this room various records relating to the Stannaries
and to the Duchy of Cornwall are said to have been preserved, while
the armies on both sides, in the civil war, were ravaging the country,
and destroying the towns.

Mr. Tonkin has remarked on the romantic and beautiful vale which
descends from Luxilian Church by Prideaux to St. Blazey Bridge, and in
explaining the phenomena of lofty and precipitous inland cliffs, he
has anticipated the most recent theories of modern geology. See
Principles of Geology, by Charles Lyell.

  This parish measures 5,041 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          3,768    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           554   16    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    875   |   1047   |    1276    |   1288
    giving an increase of 47 per cent. in thirty years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish stretches north and south across the large patch of
granite, which is situated between Bodmin and St. Austell, and also
extends over the slate at its northern and southern extremities. The
extent of surface covered by the northern slate is more than a square
mile; but the southern slate forms only a small triangle north and
north-east of St. Blazey Bridge. The northern half of this parish
corresponds with the parish of St. Dennis in the nature of its rocks;
the southern half with St. Austell and St. Blazey. The most
interesting feature of this parish, in a geological point of view,
consists of its numerous and extensive stream-works. This part of
Cornwall, including the adjoining parishes, has long been celebrated
for the fine quality of its stream-tin, which is, as to the greater
part, either crystalline, or of the kind denominated wood-tin, on
account of its fibrous texture. The gravel containing this stream-tin
rests on the rock, or on its untransported debris; above this occurs a
regular stratum of decayed trees and plants; in the deepest
stream-works these are covered by another bed of gravel containing
tin, having also a superincumbent layer of decayed trees and plants:
but this second stratum of tin, always less in quantity than the
first, is seldom of sufficient value to pay for the labour of
separation. Over all occurs a layer of uncertain thickness, composed
of the debris of adjacent rocks, and sustaining on its surface a
coating of recent vegetable, and forming marshy, arable, or meadow
land, according to the accidental situation of the spot.


THE EDITOR.

The greater part of the valleys in Cornwall having been long since
streamed, exhibit little else than heaps of unsightly rubbish; instead
of displaying, as in other districts, the most pleasing features of a
country. The late Mr. Humphrey Mackworth Praed has, however, proved in
the case of a valley at Lelant, that such deformities may be removed,
and the meadows restored to their natural beauty, accompanied even by
pecuniary advantage to the proprietor. But such improvements are
greatly obstructed by an anomalous property called the right of bounds.




MABE.


HALS.

Mabe, a vicarage, is situated in the hundred of Kerryer, and hath upon
the north Stithians, and west Constantine; east, part of Gluvias and
Bradock.

For the name, it is plain Cornish Mab or Mabe, being a son, and in
this place either to be construed in reference to Milorus (son of
Melianus, King or Duke of Cornwall), who lies buried in Milor
church-yard, and who was lord of this place, or had some jurisdiction
over it, as Milor church at this day hath in spirituals over Mabe, to
which it is considered as annexed.

Or perhaps the name of this church, Mab or Mabe, refers to our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ, to whose honour it may have been erected by
our ancestors as a pledge of their orthodox faith, in opposition to
the Ebiorite and Arian heresies.

At the time of the Norman conquest the district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Tremiloret, i. e. Milor’s Town. In the Inquisition of
the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, into the value of Cornish
benefices, Ecclesia de Sancto Milore in decanatu de Kerryer cum
Sacello (that is to say, with this church or chapel), was rated £6.
13_s._ 4_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, Milor la Vabe, or Mabe, is
valued £16. 15_s._ The patronage in the Bishop of Exon, the incumbent.
Now Milor-la-Vabe is either Milor’s son’s place, or a corruption of
Milor-ha-Vabe, i. e. Milor and mabe, or Milor and son; this parish was
rated to the 4_s._ per pound land-tax 1694, £56. 17_s._

In this place, at Tremough, is the dwelling of John Worth, Esq.
sheriff of Cornwall 10th of Queen Ann, who married Trefusis, his
father Penularick; originally descended from the Worths of Worth, in
Devon or Somerset; who giveth for his arms, in a field Ermine, an
imperial eagle with two necks Sable, armed Gules.

Tre-mayne in this parish, i. e. the town of stone, or the stone town,
transnominated the gentle family of Peares or Perys, i. e. Pearce in
English, to that of Tremayne, tempore Edward III. at which time Peres
de Tremayne was lord and possessor thereof, who married Dame Opre, or
Obre de Treskewis, and by her had issue John, that died without issue;
2ndly, Peros, that married Onera Trevartea, by whom he had issue
Richard, who had issue Thomas, that married Isabella, daughter and
heir of Trenchard of Collacomb in Devon, and removed thither, by whom
he had issue Nicholas, Canon of St. Peter’s Church, Exeter; which
Isabella, surviving her husband Tremayne, married Sir John Damerell,
Knight, sheriff of Devon 1 Richard II. 1377, by whom she had no issue:
nevertheless so prevailed with him, having no issue of his own, to
settle divers land upon her issue by Tremayne, which was a great
advancement of the estate of the Tremaynes. In 1392, Nicholas her son
aforesaid married Jane, and had issue Thomas that married Carew, who
had issue John, who by Joan Warr had issue John, who had issue Thomas,
who by Grenville had issue Roger, Edmund, and Degory; Degory had issue
Arthur, that married Grenville, by whom he had issue Edmund and
Richard, from which Richard the Tremaynes of St. Ewe are descended.
This tenement of Tremayne is long since gone out of that name, and is
now the land of persons to me unknown. Tremayne tenements are also in
St. Martyn’s in Kerrier, also in St. Colomb Major, et al. Tremayne
parish in the hundred of East.

The arms of Damorell were, Party per fess Gules and Azure, three
crescents, 2 and 1, Argent.


TONKIN.

The name of this parish in the king’s book is La Vabe, that is, St.
Vabe, or Mabe’s Place.

The chief estate in this parish, and which I shall therefore begin
with, is the manor of Carnsew, alias, says Mr. Carew, Carndew, the
black rock, or rather a heap of black rocks, this parish and estate
abounding in great rocks of moorstone. This place gave name to a very
eminent family, which removed afterwards to Bokelby in St. Kew. One of
the Carnsews of Bokelby granted a lease of the barton of Carnsew, in
the reign of Queen Elizabeth, to William Thomas, which William Thomas
from thenceforth took the name of Carnsew; and I have in my possession
a grant of arms from Sir Richard St. George, Clarenceux King-at-Arms,
to Henry Carnsew, of Trewone, junior, dated the 2d of December 1633,
recognising this assumption of a new name from his place of residence.

This family has since removed to a better settlement at Trewoon in
Budock.

Carverth, which signifies the green town, is also within and held from
this manor. This place gave name to, and was the seat of an ancient
race of gentlemen, from whom it passed to the Penalunas, till, in the
reign of King Charles the First, it was sold to Thomas Melhuish of
Penryn, merchant, descended from the Melhuishes of Northan in
Devonshire.

Tremogh, that is, the dwelling or town of hogs, is also held from this
manor, and was likewise formerly the seat of a family of the same
name, from whom it came to the family of Blois of Penryn, in which
name it continued till the year 1703, when Roger and John Blois, two
brothers, sold this barton, which is of considerable value, to John
Worth, Esq. of Penryn, who had for some time before a considerable
mortgage on it.

Mr. Worth hath built on Tremogh a very large house of moorstone
(granite), and hath inclosed a small park for deer. He hath been a
justice of the peace during all the reign of Queen Anne, King George
the First, and King George the Second; and was sheriff of the county
in the tenth year of Queen Anne. His father, Mr. William Worth, of
Penryn, merchant, married Jane, one of the daughters and coheiresses
of Pennalerick, by whom he had, among others, a second son, William
Worth, D.D. now Archdeacon of Worcester.

Mr. John Worth hath been some time a widower by the death of his wife
Bridget, daughter of Francis Trefusis, of Trefusis, Esq. who has left
him only one son, of the same name.

Hantertavas is likewise held of this manor, which signifieth the half
tongue, but why I know not.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals has been singularly unfortunate in his etymology of Tremogh,
which has therefore been omitted. Without all doubt, it means, as Mr.
Tonkin has interpreted, the hog or pig’s town; and the street leading
to Tremogh from Penryn is now called Pig’s Street. The heiress of the
Worth family married an adventurer of the name of Hamilton, who ruined
all his affairs by contested elections and extravagances. Tremogh was
sold about the year 1775; and having passed into the hands of persons
of a nearly similar description, the house remained shut up till the
wood decayed, and the place was disfigured by the sale and removal of
all the trees. The property has, however, at last been secured by a
respectable gentleman, who resides on the spot, has renovated the
house, and commenced planting and other decorations.

The most discriminating feature of this parish and of the immediate
neighbourhood, is the great abundance of granite, not merely in large
blocks, the proper moorstone, but in regular and extensive quarries;
and so great has been the exportation of this most valuable material,
that almost the whole of Waterloo Bridge, and much of the interior of
London Bridge, are constructed of stone carried to the Thames from
Falmouth harbour.

Districts abounding in crystalline rocks are usually uneven, and in
this parish the main road, leading from Helston and all the west to
Penryn and Falmouth, had to descend Mabe-hill; but in this year (1835)
the line has been turned from the south of Tremogh to a vale on the
northern side, which reduces the upper level, and converts a
precipitous descent into one sufficiently sloped for carriages of
every description. The old road has, however, still an attraction for
botanists, as the antirrhinum monspessulanum, a plant very rarely
found in other situations, grows there abundantly on the banks and
hedges.

Mr. Tonkin is mistaken in tracing the family of Tremayne, long settled
at Heligan, in St. Ewe, from the barton in this parish. That family is
unquestionably derived from Tremayne in St. Martin’s, on the Helford
river.

  Mabe measures 2029 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2383    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           317    8    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    387   |    396   |     457    |    512
    giving an increase of 32 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

One corner of this parish, immediately north of Penryn, extends on the
slate in the form of a very narrow and short stripe; but all the
remainder rests entirely on granite, which is for the most part
coarse-grained and crystalline, abounding in porphyritic crystals and
felspar. It, however, also contains numerous beds of a finer quality,
which being well adapted for building is extensively quarried.




ST. MABEN, OR ST. MABIN.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Trigg, and hath upon the north St. Kewe,
east St. Udye, south Helland, west Egleshayle. For the modern name of
this church, it signifies, in the holy or sacred son, or a church
dedicated and consecrated in honour of God the Son, in opposition to
Arianism, as aforesaid under Mabe. In the Domesday Book 1087, 20 Will.
I. this district was taxed under the jurisdiction of Treu-es-coit, i.
e. the wood-town, or town of wood; still the voke lands of a manor,
the lords whereof first endowed this church, whose names were ――――,
together with the Duke or Earl of Cornwall.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294,
into the value of Cornish benefices, Ecclesia de Maben in decanatu de
Trig Minorshire, is rated at £8. In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, it is
rated at £36. The patronage formerly in the lords of the manor
aforesaid, and the Duke of Cornwall, that endowed it; afterwards in
the Duke and Louis alternately, the which Louis sold it to Boscawen,
now in possession thereof; the incumbent Hill; and the parish rated to
the 4_s._ per pound land-tax 1696, at £158. 19_s._ by the name of St.
Mabyn or Mabin aforesaid.

Nevertheless the inhabitants of this parish, through ignorance of the
Cornish tongue, as not understanding the etymology or import of this
compound word Mab-in, have substituted St. Mabiana, as the tutelar
guardian or patroness of this church, instead of Jesus Christ the Son
of God, the true patron and defender thereof.

Coll-quite, Coll-coit, alias Killyquite, in this parish, tempore
Edward III. was the lands of Sir Richard Sergeaulx, sheriff of
Cornwall 12 Richard II. who held this place by tenure of knight’s
service, two knight’s fees and a half, Morton (see Talland and
Crowan); whose issue male failing, his three daughters and heirs were
married to Beere, Marney of Essex, and Seyntaubyn of Clowans (whose
widow Alice after his death was married to Richard de Vere, the
eleventh Earl of Oxford).

From Segreaulx’s heirs this barton and manor by descent or purchase
came to Henry Marney, sheriff of Essex, the 2d and 8th of king Henry
VII. executor of the last will and testament of Margaret Plantagenet,
alias Beaufort, daughter and heir of John Duke of Somerset (grandchild
to John of Gaunt by his son John), widow of Edmund of Hadham, Earl of
Britain and Richmond, father and mother of King Henry VII. who died
1509, and was by her executors honourably buried in the abbey of
Westminster. The arms of Marney were Gules, a lion rampant guardant
Argent.

Tre-blith-ike, alias Tre-bletike, in this parish, is now in part, or
the whole, the possession of … Hamley, Gent. that married Dingle, and
giveth for his arms, in a field Argent, three talbots passant Azure,
taloned, clawed, and langued Gules, two in chief and one in base.

Haligan, alias Hel-ligon in this parish. The first name as a
monosyllable, signifies, after the Belgick Cornish, the holy or
sacred; the second the legal nuncio or ambassador’s hall, perhaps the
spiritual legate or ambassador, viz. the minister or priest of this
parish. Otherwise, if Heligan be a Greek monosyllable, it signifies
willows or osiers, ἑλικὴ helikê, helike, salix.

This barton and manor is the dwelling of Joseph Silly, Esq. one of his
Majesty’s Commissioners for the peace, that married Cloberry, his
father Elford, originally descended from the Sillys of St. Wenn and
Minver. In this place Robert de Haligan, 3 Henry IV. held, by the
tenure of knight service, two knight’s fees. Carew’s Survey of
Cornwall, p. 42.

Pen-wyne in this parish, that is, the head or chief wyne, was the
dwelling of Porter, Gent, that married Spry; and giveth for his arms,
in a field Sable, three bells Argent, and a canton Ermine. This place
is now sold to Cole. Pen-wyn is the beloved head or promontory of
land; but properly pen gwynsa is head or chief wine.

Baldwyn, alias Bawdwyn, of Colquite, gave for his arms Gules, within a
plain bordure two bendlets Argent. Prout, id est, Proud, gave for his
arms Sable, a stag rampant Argent, depressed with a fess indented in
chief Or; the stag tripped and armed of the Same.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has not anything but what was abridged from Hals.


THE EDITOR.

Tredeathy, pleasantly situated in this parish, has been made a
handsome gentleman’s seat by the present possessor, the Rev. Francis
John Hext.

The church has several monuments; one to the memory of Grace, the wife
of Sir Richard Carnsew; and another to Mrs. Elizabeth Silly; and there
remain some slight memorials of a branch from the Godolphins, formerly
seated here. It is large, and occupies a commanding situation, with a
lofty tower, visible to a great extent in all directions. But nothing
has in modern times so much distinguished this parish as the residence
of its learned rector, the Rev. Charles Peters.

Mr. Peters’ reputation for a most profound acquaintance with oriental
literature, is sufficiently established by a controversy with the
mighty man of his time, Doctor William Warburton; but there is also a
traditional history of his benevolence, of his piety, and of his
genuine simplicity, so interesting that the Editor has most gladly
availed himself of a communication from persons nearly connected with
this great and good man, to insert it here.

     “The Rev. Charles Peters, of St. Mabyn, was descended from a
     merchant of Antwerp, who fled to England from the
     persecution of the Protestants in Germany. His grandson was
     a Turkey merchant of Fowey in the time of Queen Elizabeth:
     this gentleman was father of the famous Hugh Peters, and his
     mother was a Treffry, of Place-house.

     “The ancestor of Mr. Peters of St. Mabyn was a royalist. The
     Rev. Charles Peters was born on the 1st of December 1690. In
     Tregony, at the German school there, he was taught Latin and
     Greek, and the first rudiments of Hebrew. He was afterwards
     of Exeter College, Oxford. When first ordained he served the
     curacy of St. Justin Roseland; then was presented with the
     living of Boconnock. In 1723 the living of Bralton Clovelly
     was given to him, and three years afterwards St. Mabyn,
     where from that time he chiefly resided, but spent a part of
     each year at Bralton, keeping a curate at each. Every Sunday
     he entertained a great number of the poorest of his
     parishioners; and on Monday the remaining meat was
     distributed to them, with bread for each; and thus in
     succession he entertained all the poor of the parish; and
     there was scarcely any poor rate in St. Mabyn during his
     life.

     “He spent a large portion of his income in relieving the
     temporal wants of his fellow-creatures, and much of his time
     in their spiritual instruction. Besides morning and evening
     prayers, he read the Bible daily to his family, and also
     daily studied it himself in the original languages.

     “When he published his Dissertation on the Book of Job, and
     drew on himself the insolence of Warburton, he bore it with
     the most perfect Christian charity.

     “He had written a vindication of Homer in answer to
     Warburton. Before it was published Warburton had become a
     Bishop, when, fearing that the faults of the man might
     reflect on the sacred order, he abstained from publishing
     it, saying, ‘Thou shalt not speak evil of the rulers of thy
     people.’ Mr. Peters was of abstemious habits, regular both
     in his studies and his exercise, which the natural delicacy
     of his constitution required. He never married, but educated
     the two eldest sons of his elder brother, Dr. Joseph Peters,
     M.D. of Truro, and the Rev. Jonathan Peters, of St.
     Clement’s. The latter was bred to the church at his desire,
     and continued with him as his curate, till the living of St.
     Clement called the nephew to the cure of his own church.

     “Mr. Peters lived to the age of eighty-four, retaining the
     full possession of his faculties to the last.”

Extracts from his Meditations in manuscript:――

When speaking of Warburton, he says,

     “Let me then go on with this work which I have begun. Let me
     beg the assistance of God, that I may do it in a proper
     manner, so as not to return evil for evil, or railing for
     railing, but to preserve my temper, and to consider what the
     Dean has said, in a cool dispassionate way if possible; or
     at least to check my pen so as to say nothing that may
     misbecome me either as a Christian or a clergyman.

     “As to what relates to Dean Warburton, he has freed me, I
     think, from all manner of obligation to say anything in
     complaisance; for this, considering the usage he has given
     me, would look like stooping to him, and distrusting the
     cause I have to plead for. I must keep up my spirits then,
     but beware of transgressing the rules of charity, of
     prudence, or of good manners.

     “If it be necessary that I should publish the remainder of
     the Reply to the author of the Divine Legation, grant, oh
     Lord! that I may conduct it with all that decency and
     prudence, that strict regard to charity as well as truth,
     which may become a Christian and a minister of Christ; that
     I may have a constant check upon myself with regard to every
     thing that may be either light and ludicrous, or bitter and
     sarcastic: if my antagonist has given but too much into this
     way of writing, the greater shame to him; and the greater
     shame to me if I should not endeavour to avoid so palpable a
     fault.”

Under the influence of an opinion, or rather of a prejudice similar to
those of plenary inspiration, and an immaculate preservation of the
text, and unmindful that the Gospels themselves convey a large portion
of their instruction under the form of allegory or parable, Mr. Peters
maintained the historical authenticity of the book of Job against Dr.
Warburton, who argued in favour of the opposite and manifestly the
correct hypothesis. Yet so accurate and so extensive were the Hebrew
learning and the general erudition of this profound scholar, that he
completely worsted the most celebrated critic of his age, and drove
him from a sober investigation of facts, of ancient opinions, or of
the peculiar form and nature of moral instruction used by eastern
nations at various and remote periods, into virulent and personal
abuse.

It is curious to observe that the Book of Job has not the most remote
allusion to anything connected with the Jews, neither to their laws or
their ritual, nor to their patriarchs, or to their leader and
legislator.

And it is more curious that in all the writings transmitted to our
time by this extraordinary people, from the Book of Genesis to the
last prophecy antecedent to its Babylonish captivity, not the
slightest reference is made to a state of future existence; unless the
strange narrative respecting the Witch of Endor should be deemed an
exception, suspected as it is of interpolation; and at all events
utterly unfitted for announcing, and that too incidentally, the most
important of revealed truths. Previously, moreover, to the captivity,
no personification is ever mentioned of the Principle of Evil.――“Now
the serpent was more subtile than any beast of the field, which the
Lord God had made; and he said unto the woman,” &c. No allusion is
here made to any supernatural being; nor did the serpent lose the
disgraceful credit till three thousand five hundred years after the
fact, of having by his own unassisted subtilty, malevolence, and
craft, led our first parents into the fatal snare predestined to work
the utter and eternal destruction of countless millions of the human
race, but for the stupendous mystery of their subsequent redemption.

In the Book of Job reference is made to a future life; and the
Principle of Evil not only appears as a distinct personage, but is
placed in collision and in debate with the Principle of all Good,
driving the Divinity itself to the clumsy expedient, suited only to
the imperfections of a finite intellect, of ascertaining by an actual
experiment, whether a man were capable of sustaining certain degrees
of bodily pain and of mental affliction, without murmuring against his
Creator, the Lord and Giver of life, in whom we live, and move, and
have our being.

It seems plain, therefore, from the doctrine of a future state first
noticed in this work, from the first introduction of a being hostile
to the happiness of all others and delighting in their misery, and
from the absence of any allusion to a single fact connected with the
Mosaic dispensation, or to the history embodied in the Sacred Records;
and, lastly, from the dramatic form of the whole; that the Book of Job
must be a parable, a moral tale, a poem wholly unconnected with the
Jewish faith. It seems not to be improbable that such a composition,
teaching the important duties of resignation and submission to the
Divine will,

  Αγου δε με, Ω Ζευ, και συ γ’ ἡ Πεπρωμενη,
  Οποι ποθ’ ὑμιν ειμι διατεταγμενος,
  Ως εψομαι γ’ αοκνος· ην δε μη θελω,
  Κακος γενομενος ουδεν ηττον εψομαι,

may have been translated from the Chaldean into the Hebrew language
during the Captivity, retaining the Chaldean character, for no copy is
said to exist in the ancient or Samaritan alphabet. And a work so
excellent, so abounding in the most sublime and elevated flights of
eastern poetry, soaring towards such topics as even that poetry is
unable fully to reach, may well have been added by Ezra to the Book of
the Law which he brought before the congregation, and read before them
in the street, when they bowed their heads, and worshipped the Lord
with their faces to the ground.

The Editor has also been desirous of obtaining information respecting
another member of this family, whom, at the distance of almost two
centuries from those times of violence and of civil commotion in which
he lived, we may now consider as one persecuted in his death and in
his fame, far beyond the degree which any demerit on his part, either
as a fanatic in religion or as a partizan in politics, could have
justly merited.

He was probably selected as a victim by his opponents to gratify the
base passions of an ignorant multitude, now anxious to destroy those
whom they had previously adored; and ridicule was cast on his memory
by the triumphant party, as an expedient for beating down religious
opinions hostile to the system of ecclesiastical government then
reestablished: perhaps also, the possession of Lambeth Palace, like
that of the house adjoining the capitol by Manlius, may have excited
similar feelings; and possibly he was considered in some degree as an
equivalent for Laud.

Extract from a History written in 1781:――

     “William, Thomas, and Hugh Peters were brothers, and born at
     Fowey in Cornwall. Their father was a merchant of large
     property, and their mother was Elizabeth Treffry, daughter
     of John Treffry, Esq. of a very ancient and opulent family
     in that town.

     “William received his education at Leyden, Thomas at Oxford,
     and Hugh at Cambridge. Between the years 1610 and 1620
     Thomas and Hugh became clergymen in London. William
     continued a private gentleman. About the year 1628 Thomas
     and Hugh having rendered themselves obnoxious by their
     popularity and puritanic preaching, were silenced by the
     Bishop. They then went to Holland and remained till 1633,
     when they returned to London. The three brothers then sold
     their landed property, and in the following year embarked
     for America. Hugh settled at Salem, and soon became so
     popular as to excite the jealousy of those who had
     previously swayed the fanatical opinions of that place. Mr.
     Hugh Peters was in a short time appointed a trustee of the
     college at New Cambridge. He built a grand house, and
     purchased a large tract of land. The yard before his house
     he paved with flint-stones from England; and having dug a
     well he paved that also with flint-stones, for the
     accommodation of every inhabitant in want of water. It bears
     the name of Peter’s Spring up to the present time.

     “He here married a second time, and had one daughter named
     Elizabeth. His renown as a zealot increasing, he received an
     invitation to remove from Salem to Boston, with which he
     complied, and there laid the foundation-stone of the great
     meeting-house, of which the Reverend Doctor Samuel Cooper,
     one of the most learned literati in America, is the pastor.
     Those whose envy he had excited at Salem, ill brooked being
     thus outrivalled by Mr. Peters. Yet finding him an orthodox
     fanatic, and more powerful than themselves, they seemingly
     bowed to his superiority, at the same time that they were
     contriving a plan which ended in his destruction.

     “In 1641 they conspired with the civil authorities of Boston
     to convert their leading priest into a politician, by
     appointing him agent to Great Britain. The plot succeeded,
     and Mr. Hugh Peters assumed his agency under colour of
     petitioning for some abatement of customs and excise; but
     his real commission was to foment the civil discontents,
     wars, and jars then prevailing between the King and the
     Parliament. He did not see into the motives of these people;
     and he felt a strong inclination to chastise the Court and
     the Bishop of London, who had turned him out of the church
     for his fanatical conduct.

     “On Mr. Peters’s arrival in London, the Parliament took him
     into their service. The Earls of Warwick and of Essex were
     also his patrons. In 1644 the Parliament gave him Archbishop
     Laud’s library, and soon afterwards made him head of the
     Archbishop’s court, and gave him the estate and palace at
     Lambeth; all which he kept till the Restoration.

     “The people of Boston conducted themselves with ingratitude
     and neglect towards Mr. Peters; they never paid him any part
     of the stipend attached to his office, although he
     discharged the duties of it during twenty years, and
     obtained from the Protector a charter for the Society for
     propagating the Gospel in New England, which, by
     contributions raised in Great Britain, has supported all the
     missionaries among the Indians to the present time.

     “An occurrence at the melancholy close of Mr. Peters’s life
     evinces his firmness of mind and self-possession.

     “The sentences of our law, now barbarous in words alone,
     were in those days executed with horrors so savage, as to
     forbid description. The scenes of cruelty were repeated one
     after the other; and in his own case Mr. Peters, either from
     design or accident, remained to witness on others the
     inflictions which awaited himself. At that moment an officer
     whose heart must have been more obdurate than the hardest
     flint, or than Marperian rock, inquired of him how he liked
     the proceeding, and received for answer, ‘Friend, thou doest
     ill to distress a dying man!’”

  St. Mabyn measures 3,846 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           6051    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           383    1    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    475   |    560   |     715    |    793
    giving an increase of 67 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Granville Leveson Gower, presented by the
    Earl of Falmouth, in 1818.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is entirely situated within the calcareous series. Its
rocks are similar to those of the adjoining parishes of Egleshayle,
Helland, and St. Kew.




MAWNAN.


HALS.

It is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and hath upon the north
Constantine, east Budock, and is elsewhere surrounded with the waters
of the British ocean and Hayleford Haven.

However, the reader may take notice that long before the Norman
Conquest, even in King Alfred’s days, this district was not known but
by the name of Penwarne; viz. the voke lands of the bailywick of the
hundred of Kerryer; and its court baron hath its prison and
sub-bailiff still extant in Budock, which lands and court baron claims
the respective suits and services of the several tithings or
freeholders within its precincts, as of ancient right accustomed. And
this barton of Penwarne hath also still extant upon it an old
unendowed free chapel and burying-place of public use, before the
church of Mawnan was erected, for under the name and jurisdiction of
Penwarne this parish was taxed in the Domesday Book, 20 William I.
1087.

Though, at the time of the inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester, 1294, into the value of Cornish benefices, this parish
church was rated then by the name of Ecclesia de Mawnan, in decanatu
de Kerryer, 4_l._ 3_s._ 8_d._ In Wolsey’s inquisition, 1521, 14_l._
16_s._ 1_d._ The patronage formerly in Killygrew, afterwards Rogers,
now Kempe. The incumbent Trewinard; and the parish rated to the 4_s._
per pound Land Tax, 1696, by the name of Mawnan, 72_l._

From Pen-gwarne alias Pen-warne, synonymous words, was denominated an
old English family of gentlemen now in possession thereof, surnamed
De-Penwarne (who by possession of those lands is bailiff or lord of
the bailiwick of the hundred of Kerryer by inheritance), whose
ancestors have been seised and possessed thereof, beyond the records
of time, and have been possessed in former ages of divers other lands
of considerable value in those parts.

Particularly Richard Penwarne, Esq. that married one of the coheirs of
Tencreeke, Member of Parliament for Penryn, temp. James I.; whose son
Robert married the daughter of Robinson of London, who had issue the
present possessor, Robert Penwarne, Esq. that married Sprye of
Tregony, and hath issue; that giveth for his arms, in a field Sable a
chevron between three fleur-de-lis Argent.


TONKIN.

The manor of Trevose, that is, the town in the valley, from its
principal mansion so called, where are the ruins of a very large
house, as having been formerly a seat of the Killigrews, and
particularly in J. Norden’s time of Sir William Killigrew, to which
family, together with other lands adjoining, I suppose it came by
their marriage with the daughter and heir of Arwinick. This property
was sold to Sir Nicholas Slanning of Marystow in Devonshire, who I
believe made this place his residence, while he was Governor of
Pendinas Castle. This was the famous Sir Nicholas Slanning, so much
cried up for his valour, who had a chief command in the King’s army,
and was killed before Bristol in July 1643. He left a son of the same
name, then an infant, who was made a Baronet by King Charles II. in
1662, as he had been before that one of the Knights of the Bath at his
Majesty’s Coronation; which Sir Nicholas Slanning gave for his arms,
Argent, two pales ingrailed Gules, over all a bend Azure, charged with
three griffin’s heads erased Or.

This gentleman sold Trerose to Brian Rogers of Falmouth, merchant, who
left by his wife, the daughter of John Tregeagle of Trevorden, Esq.
one only son, Peter Rogers, Esq. who dying under age, the estate was
sold to pay his father’s debts, under the authority of an Act of
Parliament, to James Kempe of Penryn, Esq. who settled it on his
second son James Kempe; but he died in his father’s lifetime; and,
therefore, on his father’s death, in 1711, it fell to his son John
Kempe, who marrying Mary the daughter of Joshua Ratcliff of Francklyn
in Devonshire, Esq. died in May 1714, leaving an only daughter, who
died soon afterwards. The manor ultimately devolved to Nicholas Kempe
of Rosteage, Esq. who is the present lord thereof. Mr. Rogers gave for
his arms, as deriving himself from the Rogerses of Cannington in
Somersetshire, Argent, a chevron between three bucks courant Sable,
attired Or.

The advowson of the parish was appendant to this manor, but has been
severed therefrom, and now belongs to John Peters, Esq. of Harlyn.

In this parish is also Penwarne. This has been for many generations
the seat of an ancient family of the same name, where they have
flourished, being Justices of the Peace, and Members of Parliament;
they began, however, to decline about the middle of Queen Elizabeth’s
time, till Peter Penwarne, Esq. parted with almost the whole of his
landed property, except the barton. The present gentleman married
Joan, the daughter of Thomas Taylder of St. Mabe, gent.; his father
Robert the daughter and heir of Peter Spry of Tregony, merchant.

Mr. Peter Penwarne died this present year (1732), leaving two sons,
Thomas and John. The arms of Penwarne are, Sable, a chevron between
three fleurs-de-lis Or.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons gives a detailed account of the various manors.

Tresore belongs at present to the Rev. Robert Hoblyn. The manor of
Boskenso and also Penwarne, were purchased by Mr. Michael Nowell, a
merchant of Falmouth, who was knighted on presenting an address to the
King. They now belong to his nephew, the Rev. Mr. Usticke.

Mr. John Penwarne, the representative of this ancient family,
practised the law at Penryn, and married Miss Ann Kivell. He now
resides in London, and has a son and one daughter.

The Rev. John Rogers, Canon Residentiary of Exeter, is the patron and
incumbent of the living.

  This parish measures 1,702 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          2,591    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           247   11    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    427   |    497   |     536    |    578
    giving an increase of 35 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The northern part of this parish consists of felspathic hornblend
rocks, belonging to the porphyritic series, which nearly touches the
granite of Constantine and Budock. The southern part of Mawnan is
situated on the calcareous series, and some of its rocks are very
interesting, particularly those in the cliffs near the church and
Rosemullion Head.




MADDERN.


HALS.

St. Mad-darne, or Mad-ran, a Vicarage, is situate in the hundred of
Penwith, and hath upon the north Sennor or Zeynar, west Sancret, east
Gulval, south Paul and the Mount’s Bay.

At the time of the Norman Conquest this district was taxed in the
Domesday Book, under the jurisdiction of Alverton, of which more
under. In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester,
into the value of Cornish Benefices, 1294, Ecclesia de Sancti Maddarne
is rated £5. 6_s._ 8_d._ in decanatu de Penwith; prior Hospitalis
Johannis percepit in eadem £6. 13_s._ 4_d._ The meaning of which is
this: Henry de la Pomeraye, tempore Richard I. (or his ancestors)
built or endowed this church, and gave it to the Knights Hospitallers
of St. John of Jerusalem, for the health and salvation of his own
soul, that of his Lord the King, and the souls of his father, mother,
brothers, sisters, progenitors and successors, as it is set down in
that charter. See Dugdale’s Monasticon Anglicanum, vol. ii. page 792.
In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, it is valued to first fruits £21. 5_s._
10_d._ by the name of Madran as aforesaid, without the appellation or
pronoun Saint. The patronage formerly in the Knights Hospitallers of
Jerusalem at Sythney, subject to St John’s Hospital of Jerusalem at
London, after their dissolution in the Crown, now in Flemen; the
incumbent Bellot, and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound
land-tax, 1696, temp. William III. £163. 14_s._ Penzance town £139.
11_s._ 6_d._ in all £303. 5_s._ 6_d._

Who the supposed tutelar guardian of this church, St. Maddarne, was,
is past my ability of finding out, either in the legends or
martyrologies, therefore refer him to the scrutiny of the inhabitants;
only by the way let it be remembered that Galfridus Monmouthensis
tells us in his Chronicle that one Madan was a British king in these
parts before Julius Cæsar landed in Britain, and probably that he
lived or died here, in memory of whom this parish is called Madran,
now Maddarne. Here also is Maddarne Well of water, greatly famous for
its healing virtues, of which thus writes Bishop Hall of Exeter, in
his book called the Great Mystery of Godliness, p. 169, where,
speaking of what good offices angels do God’s servants.

     “Of which kind was that noe less then miraculous cure, which
     at St. Maddarn’s Well in Cornwall was wrought upon a poore
     criple; wherof, besides the attestation of many hundreds of
     the neighbours, I tooke a strict and impartial examination
     in my last triennial Visitation there. This man for sixteen
     years was forced to walke upon his hands, by reason of the
     sinews of his leggs were soe contracted that he cold not goe
     or walk on his feet, who upon monition in a dreame, to wash
     in that well, which accordingly he did, was suddainly
     restored to the use of his limbs, and I sawe him both able
     to walk and gett his owne maintenance. I found here was
     neither art or collusion, the cure done, the author our
     invisible God, &c.”

However, notwithstanding this instance of that Reverend Bishop’s, I
know no medicinal waters in Cornwall that are constantly and
universally sovereign for any disease, but only to some particular
persons, at times and seasons.

Alvorton, alias Alverton, in this parish, was the Voke lands of a
considerable manor heretofore pertaining to the Kings and Earls of
Cornwall, and under that jurisdiction and name this district of
Maddern was taxed, 20 William I. 1087, as also Paul Parish; it
consisted, temp. Edward III. of eighty-four Cornish acres of land.
Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page 46, that is to say 3600 statute
acres. (Page 131 of Lord Dunstanville’s Edition; the Cornish Acres
64).

Within the confines of this parish, or the said manor, stands Mayne
Screffes, that is to say, the written or inscribed stone, being a
monument set up of a rough perpendicular stone, in memory of a famous
Cornish-British Prince or King, that probably lived and died here, and
was interred near the same, in which stone are yet extant these
British and Latin words: “RIALOBRAN CUNOWALL FIL:” [id est, Rialobran
the son of Cunowall] which contracted Latin word fil. for filius,
shows that it was made and erected there since first the Romans came
into this land, for the Britains before had no knowledge of the Latin
tongue; which words, if not monosyllables, are compounded either of
those particles Rial-o-Bren-Cunowall fil: Extraordinary Royal or
Imperial Prince King of Wales son; or rather it ought to be thus read,
Rial-o-Bren-Cornowall filius, viz. the extraordinary Royal Prince or
King of Cornwall’s Son. For as Rial in British answers to Regalis,
Regius, Augustus, Regificus, Basilicus, in Latin, so -o- by itself to
nimius, id est, much, excessive, overmuch; and Bren, Brene, to
Princeps, a Prince, Ruler, or Chief Governor. However, let it be
remembered, in favour of the second etymology, that one Bletius (son
to Roderick King of Wales and Cornwall, anno Dom. 700,) was Prince of
Wales and also King or Prince of Cornwall. But this funeral monument
stone must have been erected before that time; for afterwards it
became lawful to bury dead human creatures in towns and cities, lastly
in churches and churchyards, though not before. [See Dr. Borlase’s
Antiquities, 2d edit. p. 391, and the plate in Lysons’s Cornwall, p.
ccxxi. Editor.]

Landithy. Landegey, Landigey, in this parish, contiguous with the
church, which signifies the temple church, was formerly the lands of
the Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem, now ―――― Flemen,
gent.

In this parish, at ―――― liveth Francis Seynt Aubyn, esq. sometime
Commissioner for the Peace, who married ―――― Arundel, of this place,
whose lands it was, and Crocker of St. Agnes, and hath issue. He is a
younger son of John Seyntaubyn, of Clowens, esq. by Godolphin of
Treveneage.

Upon the south part of this parish, at the head of St. Michael’s
Mount’s Bay, on a little promontory of land shooting into the sea, is
situate the market and coinage town of Pensance, or Penzance, which
stands now rated in the Exchequer as a noun substantive, or distinct
jurisdiction from Maddarne; whereas the borough of Camelford is taxed
under Lenteglos, Mitchell under Newlan, and St. Enedor-Bosithney under
Dundagell.

The old chapel, and the whole town of Penzance, the 20th July 1595,
was burnt to ashes by five Spanish galleys, that then came into St.
Michael’s Mount’s Bay for that purpose, of which fact there is a large
history to be seen in Mr. Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page 156, (page
381, Lord Dunstanville’s edition); since which time the new chapel
hath been founded and beautified as it now stands, and the old town
comparatively all new built of brick and stone, and augmented with a
greater number of houses than before.

It was incorporated by charter from King James the First, with the
jurisdiction of a court leet, by the name of the Mayor, Aldermen, or
Magistrates, before whose tribunal all pleas of debt and damage,
within the precincts of that borough, are judged and determined by the
said charter; it is also made the fifth town for coinage of tin, at
the usual times of the year, by the Duke of Cornwall’s officers, as
also with a weekly market on Thursdays, and fairs yearly, on Thursday
before Advent Sunday, and also on Trinity Thursday.

This town of Penzance, anno Dom. 1646, in the time of the wars between
King Charles I. and his Parliament, for the kindness and charity the
inhabitants showed to the Lord Goring’s and Lord Hopton’s troops of
horse, driven into those parts by Sir Thomas Fairfax, the Parliament
General, was made a prey to his soldiers or troops, who for two days
had the plunder of the town and its inhabitants’ goods, to the one’s
great loss and the other’s great enriching; for one of those troopers,
viz. Edward Best, of St. Wenn, had to his share five gallons of
English coin, silver and gold, and pieces of eight, as I was told by
one of his servants, that was the measurer and spectator thereof;
though long since all riotously spent, as also the shares of his
fellow-troopers Littlecot, Keen, and Lockyer of Roach.

In this port his Majesty and the Duke have their coinage hall for
coining tin, custom-house, collector, surveyor, comptroller, and
wayters for sea and land service. The chief inhabitants of this town
are John Carveth, gent. attorney-at-law, Mr. Gross, of the same
profession, Mr. Tremenheer, Mr. Williams, Mr. Veale, Mr. Rawlinge.

The arms of this town, through ignorance of the true etymology of the
name thereof, is St. John Baptist’s head in a charger.

To remove an action at law depending in the leet of Penzance to a
superior court, the writ must be thus directed: “Majori et
Burgisensibus Burgi sui de Pensance, alias Penzance, in com: Cornu:
salutem:” otherwise, “Majori, Aldermanis, et Senescallo Burgi sui de
Penzance alias Pensance, in comitatu Cornubiæ, salutem.”

On the east side of this town, on the sea shore, at the top of St.
Michael’s Mount’s Bay, stands that notable treble intrenchment of
earth, after the British manner, built as a rampart or fortress for
defence of the country against foreign invaders, called Les-cad-dock
Castle; otherwise Les-caddock, as two monosyllables, refer to Cadock,
Earl of Cornwall, whose broad camp or castle of war it was, as
tradition saith.


TONKIN.

This is a vicarage; the patronage in John Harris, esq.; the incumbent
Doctor Walter Borlase, LL.D. But note, that the patronage of this
parish is at present in the Corporation of Penzance, carrying with it
the town, and the little parish of Morvah.

Penzance.――This town is a parish of itself, but the church is a
daughter church to St. Maddarne, and passeth in the same presentation.

The village of Penzance was incorporated by King James I. on the 9th
day of May, in the 12th year of his Highness’s reign, by the name of
Mayor, Aldermen, and commonalty of the village of Penzance, and by
that name to be one body, both in name and deed, and to have perpetual
succession, and to be persons in the law, capable to purchase and
possess lands, to consist of a Mayor, annually chosen, of eight other
Aldermen, and twelve Assistants.

And at the time of the Heralds’ Visitation, the 9th day of October
1620, William Noseworthy was mayor; John St. Aubin, esq. recorder;
John Maddern, John Clyse, Robert Dunkin, John Games, Roger
Polkinhorne, William Madderne, Robert Luke, and Pasco Ellis, aldermen;
Nicholas Hext was town clerk of the said Corporation.


THE EDITOR.

The church of Maddern stands on a commanding elevation, and retains
indications of its former connexion with the Knights Templars, who are
believed to have had a preceptory or provincial establishment at
Landithy, immediately adjoining.

In the church and churchyard are monuments to various distinguished
families resident within the parish: Borlase, Nicholls, Arundell,
Harris, Pearce, Jenkin, Heckens, Clies, Pascoe, &c.; and some in
memory of strangers, who too long delayed availing themselves of the
mild climate and salubrious air of the Mount’s Bay. One of the more
ancient monuments has these lines:

  Belgium me birth, Britaine me breeding gave,
  Cornwall a wife, ten children, and a grave.

Castle Horneck is thought to be the site of a castle denominated
Hornec, or iron, from its supposed strength, and built by the Tyers,
who were lords of this district early in the times of the
Plantagenets.

This place was the residence during a long life, of the Rev. Walter
Borlase, Doctor of Civil Law, Vice-Warden of the Stannaries, and Vicar
of Maddern for more than fifty-five years, who died April 26, 1776,
aged 81 years and six months.

Doctor Borlase appears to have been universally respected, as a man of
ability and learning, and for firmness and decision of character. He
was the eldest son of Mr. John Borlase, of Pendeen in St. Just,
sometime Member of Parliament for St. Ives, and brother of the Rev.
William Borlase, also Doctor of Civil Law, and Rector of Ludgvan, our
justly celebrated historian.

Doctor Walter Borlase married Margaret, daughter of the Rev. Henry
Pendarves, vicar of the adjoining parish of Paul; and he is said in
consequence of this marriage to have quitted the law, in which
profession he could scarcely have failed of attaining some
considerable distinction. They had a very numerous family of sons and
daughters; but, none of the sons having left a son, the family estate
has passed, under an entail, to the descendants of Doctor William
Borlase, and now belongs to his great-grandson.

Doctor Walter Borlase built the house at Castle Horneck. The family
arms are, Ermine, on a bend Sable, two hands issuing at the elbows
from as many clouds Proper, and rending a horseshoe Or.

Trereife has been long the residence of the Nicholls’s, of whom the
most distinguished person was Frank Nicholls, M.D. Physician to King
George the Second, and son-in-law of the celebrated Dr. Mead. His life
has been written in Latin by Dr. Lawrence, sometime President of the
College of Physicians, with his portrait. It appears from this work
that Dr. Nicholls was born in 1699, that he became a member of Exeter
College, Oxford, in March 1714, took his degree of Doctor of Medicine
in 1729, and was chosen a Fellow of the College of Physicians in the
following year, being previously a Fellow of the Royal Society. Nine
different communications from Doctor Nicholls are printed in the
Philosophical Transactions, and he published a separate work: “De
Anima Medica,” to which is added a treatise, “De Motu Cordis et
Sanguinis in Homine Nato et non Nato.”

His reputation stands deservedly very high as an Anatomist. Several
dissections of the viper’s head and poisonous fangs, engraved for Dr.
Mead’s work, are believed to be his; and to him is attributed the
invention of what are termed corroded preparations. He died in January
1778, having completed his 79th year.

This gentleman’s elder brother married in London, but finally settled
at Trereife, with one son and two daughters. The two daughters
married, the eldest Mr. Love of Penzance, the second William Harris,
of Kenegie, Esq. but neither left any family. The son, William
Nicholls, married Miss Ustick, of Penzance, and died leaving one son.
Mrs. Nicholls subsequently married the Rev. Charles Valentine Le
Grice, of Bury St. Edmunds, then Lecturer of Penzance, and bore him a
son, who, together with Mr. Le Grice, now hold the estate as tenants
in remainder, and by the courtesy, under the will of Mr. Nicholls,
Jun. who lived to the age of twenty-three or twenty-four years.

Trengwainton appears to have been inhabited by branches of the
Arundell family, for a long series of years, and finally the last Mr.
Arundell, of Menadarva, removed there, having in a great measure
rebuilt the house. Soon after his decease it was sold, and Mr. Praed,
of Trevethow, became the purchaser. Trengwainton was thus chiefly used
as a farm-house till the late Sir Rose Price, wishing to form a seat
in that neighbourhood, obtained it as an accommodation from the late
Mr. Praed, and under his hands it has become a splendid residence.

It appears that a gentleman of the name of Price accompanied Venables
and Penn in their successful expedition against Jamaica, during the
Protectorate, and obtained an extensive grant of land, which his
descendants lived on and improved, till early in the last century one
of the sons was sent to England for education and health. It is
understood that Doctor Nicholls was consulted as a physician, and that
he recommended the climate of Penzance; perhaps Mr. John Price may
have been the first invalid ever sent from a distance to breathe the
soft air of this all but island in the Atlantic. At that time Mr.
Henry Badcock, from the parish of Whilstone, in the north-eastern
extremity of Cornwall, held the office of Collector at Penzance, where
he had married Parthenia Keigwin, daughter of Mr. John Keigwin, of
Mousehole. The young patient was received into their house by Mr. and
Mrs. Badcock, who had several daughters. Mr. Price married in the year
1736 Margery, one of their daughters; but having gone back to Jamaica
he died there three years afterwards, leaving her with an only son,
also John Price.

This gentleman, having gone through the usual stages of education,
ending with Trinity College, Oxford, went also to Jamaica, and there
married Elizabeth Williams Bramer, daughter of John Bramer, a
physician. They had only one son, who lived to a mature age, and
succeeded his father in January 1797.

Mr. Rose Price, in the subsequent year, married Miss Elizabeth
Lambert, a young lady from the county of Meath, born on the 12th of
April 1782, by a singular coincidence on the very day that Admiral
Rodney’s victory saved Jamaica from being captured by the French, and
therefore about sixteen at the time of her marriage. Mr. Price served
the office of Sheriff for Cornwall in the year 1814, as his father had
done forty years before, in the year 1774. In this year also he was
made a Baronet, in consequence of a promise from King George the
Fourth, then Regent.

Lady Price died early in life, leaving a large family; and Sir Rose
Price died on the 29th September 1834, having nearly completed his
65th year.

And here I would add a few lines to commemorate a gentleman whose
progress through life was mainly guided by his connexion with this
family, and whose conduct reflects credit on them for their choice.

In compliance with a custom evidently derived from the Catholic times
of our forefathers, when every thing relating to the church was
transacted in the language of ancient Rome, all boys whose parents
were raised above the lowest state in society, went for six or twelve
months to a Latin school. Mr. John Vinicombe was among the number, but
his progress exhibited so great a superiority above other scholars of
his age, that Mr. Perkin, the Lecturer and schoolmaster, prevailed on
his father to allow of his staying an additional year. Just at that
moment Mr. John Price placed his son at the same school; and, at the
suggestion probably of Mr. Perkin, Mr. Price was induced to purchase
at some small premium a further continuance of Mr. Vinicombe at the
school, that he might assist, instruct, and be in some degree the
companion of Mr. Rose Price.

A connexion thus formed naturally went on; Mr. Vinicombe became a
member of Pembroke College, Oxford, where he obtained a Fellowship;
attended Mr. Rose Price to the school at Harrow, and acted as his
private tutor when he became a gentleman commoner of Magdalen; made
with him the tour of Europe; and finally, attended his friend and
former pupil to Jamaica, where, by a residence of about two years,
they nearly doubled the value of the estate. Soon after their return
to England Mr. Vinicombe went to his Fellowship, and became not only a
college tutor but one of the Public Examiners, under the then recent
statute, and he had confident expectations of preferment in the
church; but a premature death terminated his useful and honourable
career, occasioned (or hastened at least) by a fall from his horse. An
excellent picture of Mr. Vinicombe, by Mr. Opie, has gone to Pembroke
College, under the will of Sir Rose Price.

Rosecadgwell has been for a considerable time in the family of
Borlase. Mr. John Borlase, father of the two Doctor Borlases, removed
there from Pendeen in the latter portion of his life; and Samuel
Borlase, Esq. representative of this ancient and respectable family,
resides there at present.

Nanceolvern almost adjoins Rosecadgwell. This was the residence of Mr.
Carverth. After building there an excellent house, Mr. Carverth died
in very embarrassed circumstances, which gave rise to an unusual
extent of litigation. This place, however, was purchased by one of the
Mr. Urlicks, and it now belongs to Mr. Scobell, who married the
heiress of that branch of the family.

Poltare has a large and decorated house, built by the late Mr. Richard
Heckens, of St. Ives, who married one of the daughters and coheiresses
of Mr. George Veale. That place has passed by purchase also to the
Scobell family.

Trenear was formerly a seat of the Olivers. The last of this family,
Doctor William Oliver, a physician, died at Bath in 1764; and another
William Oliver, M.D. had the honour of accompanying King William in
the expedition which placed him on the throne, to preserve the civil
and religious liberties of England. Trenear was sold soon after the
younger Dr. Oliver’s decease, and purchased by Mr. Robyns, who built
there a good house, and made it a gentleman’s seat. It afterwards
became the property and residence of the Rev. Anthony Williams,
sometime Vicar of St. Kevern, and it has passed with one of his
daughters and coheiresses to Henry Pendarves Tremenheere, Esq. late
Captain of one among the first-rate ships in the East India Company’s
Service, where he merited and obtained the approbation, esteem, and
respect of every individual with whom he had the slightest connexion,
and the same effects of honour, ability, and kindness of heart, have
followed him into retirement.

Rose Hill has a good house, built about the commencement of this
century by Richard Oxnam, Esq. who served the office of Sheriff in the
year 1810. It has since become the property and residence of the Rev.
Uriah Tonkin, recently appointed Vicar of Lelant.

Lariggan is remarkable for the beauty of its situation; having been
selected, and a neat house built there, by Mr. Thomas Pascoe, a worthy
and respectable magistrate. And just above the town of Penzance stands
a house having almost the appearance of a palace, built some years
since by an individual of the name of Pope.

Mr. Pope was originally from Camelford; he conducted business for some
time at Bristol, and then emigrated to the United States, where he
accumulated a large fortune, unknown and forgotten by his family; till
on a sudden he appeared at Penzance, recognised some relations, and,
having purchased a few acres of ground, he built this magnificent
house, which instantly became known by general acclamation as the
Vatican, a name suited at once to its splendour, to its elevated
situation, and to its founder’s name. Mr. Pope scarcely lived to
inhabit this mansion; but left it to his nephew Mr. Vibert, to whose
patriotism, skill, and perseverance, as a member of the corporation,
Penzance is mainly indebted for several of its improvements, and
especially for its new church. The house is now inhabited by Mrs.
Rogers, widow of the late Mr. John Rogers, of Penrose, near Helston,
and her daughters.

Lanyon was in former times the residence of one branch of the ancient
and respectable family bearing that name. It now belongs to Mr.
Rashleigh, of Menabelly; the farm, however, possesses one of those
monuments in comparison with which all family records are modern.

In a croft near the side of the road leading from Penzance towards
Morva, stands the Cromleigh or Coit described by Doctor Borlase, in
pp. 230, 231, of his Antiquities, 2d edition. It fell down and has
been replaced, (see the Logging Rock under St. Levan). Dr. Borlase
mentions another Cromleigh at Malfra, in this parish, and two others
in the adjoining parishes of Morva and Zennor, all within a few miles
of each other. These monuments, scattered over a large portion of
Europe, bear all the marks of great antiquity. Their construction is
rude as well as simple, a flat but unhewn stone, laid on three
columnar stones, also in their natural slate, and all of Cyclopean
dimensions. The flat stone at Lanyon has been estimated at twenty ton.

Their use is much less certain. They are generally supposed to be
sepulchral monuments; but the flat surface of the upper stone always
inclined at a small angle from the horizon, would seem to countenance
the opinion of their being meant for religious observances, probably
for sacrifices, which is further countenanced by the etymology of the
name, if it means in Celtic the Holy Hearth.

Landithy, the college or preceptory of the Knights Templars, belonged
for several generations to the Flemings, a family now quite extinct,
and their property alienated.

The great tithes of this parish belonged to the Knights Templars,
under a gift from Henry de Pomeroy, one of the great family of the
Pomeroys, Lords of Bury Pomeroy Castle. They were given by Henry the
Eighth to some private person, and have belonged for a considerable
time to the family of Nicholls, now Le Grice.

The Vicarage has passed through other hands. It is related by Hals and
Tonkin to have belonged to Fleming and to Harris, and then by purchase
to the corporation of Penzance, from which body it passed by sale to
the family of Borlase, and is now vested in the heir-at-law, or in the
devisee of the late Samuel Borlase, Esq.

But at a remote period the baronial residence of an extensive lordship
was at Alverton, held by the Pomeroys; and Mr. Lysons says that it
passed successively through the Tyes, Lisles, and Berkeleys, till
reverting to the Crown it was granted to Whitmore and others, and has
been divided and subdivided. Scarcely a trace can be seen at Alverton
of its former magnificence. The portion still claiming the nominal
distinction of Manor of Alverton, Penzance, and Mousehole, was bought
of the Keigwins by the late Mr. George Veale, second son of Mr. Veale,
of Trevaila, who acquired a considerable fortune at Penzance by the
practice of the law; afterwards divided between his three
daughters,――one married to Mr. Hickens, of Poltair; another to Mr.
Baines, a Captain in the Navy; and the third to Mr. Jenkin, an officer
in the army. These ladies, or their families, have since disposed of
Alverton, and the whole is now vested in James Halse, Esq. M. P. for
St. Ives.

Maddern Well is one of the numerous springs of water almost revered in
former times on account of imputed supernatural virtues; and it has in
reality, from time out of mind, diffused health and comfort over the
thousands of persons inhabiting Penzance, the stream having been
conducted there by a winding channel of some miles in extent, and
arriving at the highest part of the town, it is enabled to flow down
to the sea through every street.

Penzance, the most western market town in Cornwall, is one of the most
flourishing. It appears to have been in former times no more than a
small village, occupying the promontory now distinguished as the Quay,
where stood a chapel, dedicated to St. Anthony, the Patron of
fishermen, which in all probability gave it the name of Pen-sance, or
the holy head (land), and it seems further probable that the new
church or chapel yard may have been an ancient fortress for the
protection of the place. Houses however gradually extended beyond this
narrow limit; and the place had acquired some magnitude, when, in the
year 1595, on the 23d of July, a predatory squadron of ships from
Spain, stood into the bay, and landing about two hundred men,
destroyed Mousehole, burnt Paul Church, and did much injury to
Penzance; see Carew, Lord Dunstanville’s edition, p. 381. But, as
appears from history to be very usual in such cases, the town arose
with increased splendour from its ashes, and a charter of
incorporation having been soon after, in 1614, granted by King James
the First, measures were taken by this new body of trustees for
insuring the increase and prosperity of the district committed to
their charge. The most material of these were purchasing the
seignorage of the harbour, and of the market, and of fairs, which
according to the rude policy of former times had been vested in
private persons, for individual benefit; the first of whom was Alice
de Lisle, lady of the manor of Alverton, about the year 1332.

The Corporation also acquired a piece of ground called the
three-cornered spot, on which a spacious market house was constructed,
and buildings proper for shops and for merchandize, were raised on the
three faces of the triangle. Penzance acquired also the privilege of
being a coinage town. From this period it continued gradually to
increase in size, in wealth, and in consideration, notwithstanding
some adverse events in the Civil War, till the progress received an
almost unlooked-for acceleration by another effort of the faithful
trustees for the place, the body corporate. They, by a series of
judicious efforts, continued for many years, at last completed a Pier,
so extensive and well placed as to afford shelter for perhaps a
hundred vessels, to admit several of the largest size used for
traders, and to afford every accommodation and facility for the
shipping or unshipping of merchandize. From the completion of this
great work in 1813, up to the present period, Penzance has flourished
beyond example; and though much may be imputed to the general
prosperity of the times, and to the diffusion of knowledge, yet by far
the greater part must be ascribed to the management of an
unappropriated fund, by a body of honest and disinterested trustees,
for the public benefit; and the Editor is especially disposed to bear
this testimony to one Corporation, at a period (1835) when all
municipal bodies are about to be remodelled, on the alleged ground of
their insufficiency for useful purposes.

Penzance, for all ecclesiastical matters forming a part of the parish
of Maddern, has long had a chapel of ease, with a lecturer appointed
for life by the corporation, on an endowment made in 1680 by Mr. John
Tremenheere, at that time a merchant residing in the town, and either
the direct or collateral ancestor of the very respectable family of
that name still remaining in the town and neighbourhood.

It has since been augmented by Queen Anne’s Bounty; but, the chapel
having become wholly inadequate to the population, a church has been
built in its place, accompanied by a lofty tower, and all constructed
of granite, so as to add, in a most extraordinary degree, to the
beauty of the town, and at the same time to afford every convenience
that the space could possibly admit; and it is pleasing to add, that
the work has been conducted and executed by all the parties concerned,
in a manner highly creditable to their taste, to their judgment, and
to their care in the expenditure of public money. But among the
gentlemen who have exerted themselves in different ways, it would be
unfair not particularly to mention Mr. Vibert, whose general skill,
ability, and accurate knowledge of details have been most conspicuous
throughout the whole undertaking; and the Editor hopes that the ties
of consanguinity will not be thought of a nature to preclude him from
referring here to the late Mr. Edward Giddy, who, in the situation of
chief magistrate, conferred on him, over and over again, in every
other situation, on all occasions, and especially in regard to this
splendid and useful building, proved himself the active, zealous, and
intelligent friend of the town and of all its inhabitants; and it is
further gratifying to state, that the existing members of the family
of Tremenheere, in emulation of their ancestor, to whom the chapel is
indebted for its original endowment, have added the splendid
decoration of painted glass over the whole east window of the chancel.
The new church will be opened for divine service in the present year;
and in this year also, as perhaps the last act of a select corporate
body, which, in the administration of an income little short in its
gross amount of two thousand pounds a year, may challenge the most
minute investigation, the town and neighbourhood will receive the
benefit of a new, commodious, and extended market-house, with the
usual appendages, fully adequate to the still increasing opulence and
commerce of the place.

Penzance may justly be proud of the many distinguished families and
individuals connected with it: Clive, Fleming, Borlase, Tremenheere,
Tonkin, Veale, John, Pellew, Batten, Carne, Davy, Boase, Colston,
Giddy. It would require a volume to give even a slight history of each
family, and of its individual members.

The Tonkins were long represented by Mr. Uriah Tonkin, who, through a
life extended far beyond the period usually assigned to human nature,
obtained universal regard and esteem. This gentleman had several sons;
from one of whom is descended the Reverend Uriah Tonkin, now Vicar of
Lelant. Another son, Mr. John Tonkin, pursued the practice of medicine
till he succeeded to the family estate. He was distinguished for
ability, good nature, and for quaintness of expressions in the form of
apophthegms; but the most remarkable incident in Mr. John Tonkin’s
life was his adoption of Humphry Davy, with the intention of educating
him to the medical profession, and making him his successor. Davy,
having succeeded to a small fortune on the decease of his father,
soared above the narrow limits of a country practitioner, and was
preparing himself for Edinburgh, when the Editor most fortunately
directed his course to Clifton, where Dr. Beddoes was then engaged in
applying pneumatic chemistry in aid of the Bristol waters for the cure
or alleviation of incipient consumption; from thence he fought his way
to the pinnacle of honour attached to experimental science.

Everything of importance in the life of this extraordinary man has
been given with accuracy and ability by Doctor Paris, in a Life of
Davy, 1 vol 4to. or 2 vols. 8vo. Colburn and Bentley. 1831.

The family of Batten have been for some time the leading merchants of
Penzance. They have recently lost Mr. John Batten, distinguished by
the intelligence and liberality incident to gentlemen in that
profession; but he has left a family more than promising to support
his reputation and the credit of his ample fortune; and this family
has the honour of possessing the Reverend Joseph Hallett Batten, D.D.
Principal of the East India College.

This gentleman having been placed at Trinity College, Cambridge, by
the Editor’s recommendation, immediately distinguished himself in the
public examinations and by obtaining college prizes; and on taking his
degree Mr. Batten became Third Wrangler. These honours led at once to
a Fellowship, and to the most desirable private tuitions; and, having
married, he was placed at the head of an institution destined to
prepare the minds and the habits of young men for the government of a
vast empire.

Mr. William Carne came to Penzance about sixty years ago, where, by
active and intelligent industry, he has acquired an ample fortune. Of
his son, Mr. Joseph Carne, it would not be an easy task to speak in
terms sufficiently laudatory: I therefore refer to his communications
in the Transactions of the Geological Society of Cornwall, to his most
ample and valuable collection of natural history, and to his patronage
of every institution established for the diffusion of knowledge.

The late Mr. Boase left Cornwall at an early age, and became the
active partner in a London bank, from whence he returned to Penzance,
and conferred important benefits on the town as a magistrate and
member of the corporation, and by the judicious employment of his
capital. His eldest son Dr. Henry S. Boase supports, as Secretary, the
Geological Society, instituted by Doctor Paris in the year 1814.
Besides papers in these Transactions, Dr. Boase has published,
“Primary Geology,” a separate work, in 1 vol. 8vo. Longman and Co.
1834, which has attracted the attention of natural philosophers
throughout Europe; and although this is not the place to express my
individual gratitude, yet I may say, that the most valuable additions
to Mr. Hals’s and Mr. Tonkin’s parochial histories will be found in
Doctor Boase’s geological description of each separate parish.

I cannot omit here to notice, among the inhabitants who have done
credit to Penzance, my late respected relation Mr. Thomas Giddy, as a
gentleman, a scholar, and a man of unblemished reputation. He came to
Penzance in the year 1774, was chosen Mayor ten different times, and
in his last mayoralty mainly assisted in carrying into execution a
great improvement of the town, by removing the Coinage Hall from a
place adjoining the Market House, to a proper situation near the quay,
permission for which the Editor had the good fortune to obtain from
the Lord Warden and the Duchy Officers. Mr. Giddy died July the 26th,
1825, having nearly completed his eighty-fourth year, and having
somewhat more than completed the sixtieth year of his marriage. His
widow survived him about five years.

Dr. Stephen Luke was also from Penzance. He practised with much
success and reputation at Falmouth, Exeter, and London, where he died
on the 30th of March 1829.

Finally, I may state that the intrepid and successful Admiral Pellew,
although not a native of Penzance, received his nautical education in
this town.

A grammar school has long been endowed by the Corporation; and the
master used formerly to hold in addition the lecturership of the
chapel.

The Reverend James Parkin, afterwards Rector of Okeford in Devonshire,
held both offices for a considerable time; and under his care, for
about eighteen months, the Editor received the only instruction for
which he is indebted to a stranger.

The school is now presided over by the Reverend Mr. Morris, M.A. from
Balliol College, Oxford; and Mr. Le-Grice having resigned the
lecturership, after holding it above twenty years, has been succeeded
by the Reverend Mr. Vyvyan, of Trelowarren.

Penzance has become, in the last half century, a considerable resort
of invalids; and much benefit has been received in pulmonary cases
from the mildness and comparatively even temperature of the climate,
which has been most satisfactorily established by the observations of
Mr. Edward Giddy, printed in the Journal of Philosophy. For a detailed
account of Penzance and of the Mount’s Bay, in a medical point of
view, the reader is referred to the works of Dr. Paris, who resided
some years in the town, till he left it to acquire one of the most
extensive fields of practice in London.

An event occurred at Penzance in the year 1760, of a nature so curious
as to be well worthy of remembrance. This country was then deeply
engaged in what has since been termed the seven years’ war; and,
notwithstanding the splendid successes of 1759, the nation still felt
alarm from the always threatened invasion by France, and from the fear
of predatory excursions, when in the night following the 29th of
September the town was roused by the firing of guns, and soon after by
the intelligence of a large ship of a strange appearance having run on
shore on the beach towards Newlyn. Great numbers of persons crowded to
the spot, where they were still more astonished and shocked by the
sight of men still stranger than their vessel, each armed with a
scymetar and with pistols. It was now obvious that they were Moslems;
and a vague fear of Turkish ferocity, of massacre and plunder, seised
the unarmed inhabitants, just awakened from their sleep in the middle
of the night. A volunteer company obeyed, however, with alacrity the
beat to arms, and 172 men were conducted or driven into a spacious
building which then stood on the Western Green, and for some reason or
other was called the Folly. Eight men were found to be drowned. Before
morning it was ascertained from themselves, by some who understood the
_lingua Franca_, that the ship was an Algerine corsair, carrying 24
guns, from nine to six pounders, and that the Captain had steered his
vessel into the Mount’s Bay, and run it against the shore under a full
conviction that he was safe in the Atlantic Ocean, at about the
latitude of Cadiz, thus committing an error of thirteen degrees in
latitude. The instant it was known that the sailors were Algerines, a
fear seized the town and neighbourhood scarcely less formidable than
the other of massacre and plunder――namely, of the plague. The
volunteers, however, kept watch and ward to prevent all intercourse.
Intelligence was conveyed to the government, and orders are said to
have been issued for troops to march from Plymouth for surrounding the
whole district; but most fortunately the local authorities ascertained
that no cause whatever existed for such a precaution, and the orders
were countermanded.

When it was found safe to visit the strangers, curiosity attracted the
whole neighbourhood. Their Asiatic dress, long beards and mustachios,
with turbans, the absence of all covering from their feet and legs,
the dark complexion and harsh features of a piratical band, made them
objects of terror and of surprise.

They were on the whole treated kindly; their vessel had totally
disappeared, and consequently after some delay a ship of war took all
the men on board, and conveyed them to Algiers.

The tower of Penzance Church is situated in latitude 50° 6′ 48″;
longitude 5° 31′ 0″; in time 22m. 4s. west of Greenwich, as deduced
from the Trigonometrical Survey.

The establishment of the port, or the time of high water at the new
and full of the moon, is 4h. 30m. very nearly. London Bridge being 2h.
7m.

The establishment of the Lizard is about 5h.; Portbend 6h.; Beechey
Head 10h.; Dover 11h; Margate 12h.; mouth of the Thames 1h.; so that
the tidal wave occupies about 9h. 30m. in flowing from the Land’s End
to London Bridge.

  The parish of Maddern measures 5450 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815:
            Parish                          8,454    0    0
            Penzance                       10,401    0    0
                                           ――――――――――――――――
                                          £18,055    0    0
                                           ――――――――――――――――
  Poor Rate in 1831:
            Parish                            593    7    0
            Penzance                          811   11    0
                                           ――――――――――――――――
                                            £1,404  18    0
                                           ――――――――――――――――
  Population, in 1801, in 1811, in 1821, in 1831,
        Parish   1564     1817     2011     2058
        Penzance 3382     4022     5224     6563
                 ――――     ――――     ――――     ――――
                 4940     5839     7235     8621
    giving an increase on the parish of 31½ per cent.; on the town of
      94 per cent.; on both of 74 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

A large portion of this parish is situated on granite, the boundary
line of which extends from near the church, in a semicircular form, to
Buryas Bridge. South of this line the parish consists of felspar,
hornblend, and actynolite rocks, all of which occur both in massive
and in schistose forms. A fine instance of the latter may be seen at
the back of the quay at Penzance, and may be traced for some distance
in a westerly direction on the sea shore below high-water mark. About
half way to Newlyn another bed of porphyry, or an irregular
continuation of the former, was a few years since explored for tin,
and became the celebrated Wherry Mine, yielding not only a large
quantity of tin, so as to afford profit after paying the expenses of a
steam-engine, but also beautiful specimens of rare metallic minerals.
For an account of this curious submarine mine, Mr. Hawkins’ Paper in
the Transactions of the Cornwall Geological Society, vol. 1, p. 127,
may be consulted; and in the third volume of the same work, p. 166,
will be found an account of the sand bank and submarine forest
existing near the same spot (by Dr. Boase. ED.). Every part of this
parish appears to be intersected with metalliferous veins; some copper
and small quantities of lead have been raised, but tin is the only
metal that has yet proved of importance.

To the above the Editor must add, that Penzance has the good fortune
to possess a geological and mineralogical treasure peculiarly its own.

In the year 1814 Doctor Paris and Mr. Ashurst Majendie began to
institute the Geological Society, and to form a museum. The Society
has flourished far beyond any expectation that could have been
originally formed; and the collection has been enriched by the
liberality of Mr. Carne, Dr. Barham, Mr. Henwood, and others; but,
above all, by Doctor Boase, who has deposited specimens from all parts
of Cornwall, collected on an actual survey extended to each individual
parish. All these specimens are arranged, labelled, and numbered, with
reference to their localities and to his admirable work.

For the general arrangement of the cabinet, with indexes, &c. the
Society and the public are indebted to the ingenuity and industry of
the late Mr. Edward Giddy; and the room of the Cornwall Geological
Society at Penzance may justly be pointed out to scientific strangers
as the object most worthy of their attention throughout the whole
extent of the country.




MAKER.


HALS.

Maker Vicarage is situate in the hundred of East, and hath upon the
east Plymouth Harbour and St. Nicholas Island, north Millbrook and
East Anthony, south and west Rame and St. John’s.

In the Domesday Book 20 William I. 1087, this district was taxed in
Cornwall by the name of Macret-tone.

In the Inquisition into the value of Cornish Benefices 20 Edward I.
1294, made by the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, Ecclesia de
Macre, in decanatu de Estwellshire 100_s._ Vicar ejusdem 53_s._ 4_d._
In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, it is rated by the name of Meker 23_l._
11_s._ The patronage in Edgcumbe, the incumbent Mitchell, and the
parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax 1696, 143_l._ 11_s._

Part of Maker, and those lands called Mount Edgcumbe, were formerly
the lands of Durneford of Devon, of which family, Stephen Durneford
was Sheriff of Devon 6 Henry V. 1413, and of Cornwall 7 Henry V. 1419,
whose great granddaughter, (the issue male failing) the sole heir of
the family, was married to Sir Piers Edgcumbe, Knight, Lord of
Cotehele in Cornwall by long inheritance, and of East Stonehouse in
Devon, whose ancestor Peter Edgcumbe, Esq. 12 Henry VI. 1443, was
certified by the Commissioners to be one of the gentry of the county
of Devon. He was the father of Richard Edgcumbe, afterwards knighted,
Sheriff of Devon 2d Henry VII. 1487, when John Tremayne was Sheriff of
Cornwall; the which Mr. Edgcumbe was a gentleman that hazarded his
life and fortune in espousing the Earl of Richmond’s case and title to
the Crown in opposition to King Richard III. He then lived at Cotehele
aforesaid in Calstock parish; and being discovered to be one of that
faction or party, he was forced to abscond and retire into the thick
woods that then were and still are about Cotehele; nevertheless, King
Richard, having notice of his absconding, ordered his officers to make
diligent search for him, and in all probability had taken him, had he
not rescued himself from their pursuit by an unparalleled accident, as
Mr. Carew in his Survey of Cornwall, p. 114, (page 270, Lord
Dunstanville’s edition), informs us, viz. “at such tymes as those
searchers were in his woods, and himself hid in a secret hole of the
sea cliffe, the tide being full up, he put a small stone into his
wearinge cap and threw it into the sea, which swimming in the water
the winds and waves tossed it to and fro that it soone came to those
seekers’ sight and observation.”

Whereupon they concluded he had leapt into the sea and drowned himself
for fear of their discovery and being taken by them, and so left over
further quest after him, which gave him opportunity soon after in a
small ship to waft over the British Channel to Britany to the Earl of
Richmond, with whom afterwards he returned again into England, and was
engaged with him in the battle of Bosworth Field in Leicestershire,
where King Richard’s army was overthrown and himself slain upon the
spot. When soon after the said Mr. Edgcumbe was by King Henry VII.
knighted and made one of his Privy Council; and as a further reward of
his good services, rewarded with the whole estate and lands of
inheritance of Sir Henry Trenoweth, of Bodrigan, Knight, of a very
great value, then forfeited by attainder of treason on the part of
King Richard III. against King Henry VII.; as also with the Castle and
Lordship of Totnes in Devon, with much other lands of John Lord Zouch,
then also for the same fact forfeited by attainder of treason against
King Henry VII.

This Sir Richard Edgcumbe, Knight, married Tremayne, and had issue
Peers, afterwards knighted, that married Durneford’s heir aforesaid,
and had issue Richard, afterwards knighted, that married Tregian, of
Walveden, who had issue Peter, that married Margaret, daughter of Sir
Andrew Luttrell, Knight, in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth’s reign,
who gave for his arms, Gules, on a bend Ermine between two cottices
Or, three boar’s heads couped. Sir Richard Edgcumbe, Knight, Privy
Councillor to King Henry VII. as Mr. Carew saith, in the place where
he hid himself in Cotehele woods aforesaid, built a chapel to the
honour of Almighty God, in testimony of his thankful remembrance of
God’s preserving him from the hands of his enemies then at his heels.

Him or his father I take also to be that Edgecumbe which founded at
West Conworthy, on the west side of the river Dart, between the towns
of Totnes and Dartmouth in Devon, a priory of Benedictine monks, whose
revenues out of Zouch’s lands was valued 26 Henry VIII. when
dissolved, 63_l._ 2_s._ 10_d._ as the Monasticon Anglicanum informs
us.

At which time it was purchased of the Crown by William Harris, Esq.
father of Sir Thomas Harris, of Hayne, Knight and Sergeant-at-law,
tempore Elizabeth, who made it the place of his residence; but in the
third descent it came to be divided between the daughters and heirs of
Sir Edward Harris, Knight, the house being now comparatively
demolished. Now as from the premises it appears those gentlemen’s
estates were greatly augmented by the bounty of King Henry VII. so
after a grateful manner they have converted great sums of money
towards the service of their prince and country; and to this purpose I
find it recorded, that as

Sir Richard Edgcumbe the first was Sheriff of Devon 2d Henry VII. so
his son Sir Peers or Peter Edgcumbe aforesaid, was Sheriff of Devon
10th Henry VII. also the 13th; also the 9th of Henry VIII. also the
20th; also Sir Richard Edgcumbe that married Tregian, and built the
present house here called Mount Edgcumbe, 36th Henry VIII. also the
1st of Queen Mary; also Peter Edgcumbe his son 9th Elizabeth.

And of Cornwall Sir Peter Edgcumbe 14th and 15th of Henry VII. also
21st; also 8th of Henry VIII. also 26th. Sir Richard Edgcumbe 2d and
3d of Queen Mary, also Peter Edgcumbe 11th of Elizabeth, Richard
Edgcumbe 8th James I. in all or total sixteen times Sheriff of
Cornwall and Devon, from the year 1487 to the year 1640, which is but
150 years; the like instance of Sheriffs not to be given of any other
family in England except the Arundels, of Lanhearne, Trerice, and
Tolverne, who have been twenty times.

Richard Edgcumbe, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 8th of King James I. had
issue Richard Edgcumbe, Esq. created one of the Knights of the Bath,
at the Coronation of King Charles II. He married the Lady Anne
Montagu, daughter of the Right Honourable Edward Earl of Sandwich, and
had issue Richard Edgcumbe, Esq.

Finally, Mr. Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall, hath written so large a
history of this family, the magnificence of the house, and sweetness
of the dwelling, that I refer the reader thereto as not being able to
make further addition.

Half of Millbrook in this parish and of Mount Edgcumbe lands, are part
of the county of Devon, though severed from it by the Tamerworth sea
or harbour ever since King Athelstan, anno Dom. 930, separated Devon
from Cornwall, and made them several jurisdictions, which before were
but one county or regniculum; and the reason in all probability why
several parcels of land, not only here in this place, but in divers
others on the east and west side of the Tamer river, the Devonshire
side lands are annexed to Cornwall, and the Cornwall side lands to
Devon, was in all probability by reason the owners of those lands were
possessed of lands both in Devonshire and Cornwall; and it could not
in any sense consist with justice that the Cornish men should lose
their lands in Devon, or the Devonshire men lose their lands in
Cornwall, because those counties were divided by the river Tamar, and
both people under the dominion of one king.

This town of Milbrook, as I am informed, amongst others was once
privileged with the jurisdiction of sending of two Members to sit in
the Lower House of Parliament, but was divested of that privilege
_propter paupertatem, tempore_ Henry VIII. for that the town was not
able to pay their Burgesses’ salary of 4_s._ per diem whilst they sat
in Parliament; however, Mr. Carew in his Survey of Cornwall, p. 101,
tells us, that within his memory this town had near forty ships and
barks at one time pertaining to the inhabitants thereof, that followed
trade, merchandize, and fishing; but upon the breaking out of Queen
Elizabeth’s wars with Spain, the townsmen neglected their usual honest
employments and took up a more compendious though not so honest way of
gaining, and began by little and little to reduce those plain dealers
to their former undeserved plight, &c. _id est_, by piracy and
privateering at sea.

In this parish standeth Cremble Passage, the common place of
transferring passengers by boat or barge over the rapid and dangerous
waves of the Tamerworth Harbour or Sea Haven from the Cornish shore to
the Plymouth or Devonshire side or lands, wherein many persons
heretofore by the violence of the seas and wind in their passage have
lost their lives.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has not noticed this parish.


THE EDITOR.

This parish, forming the western boundary of Plymouth harbour, and
extending between Hamoaze and the sea, occupies a situation more
beautiful than any other on the whole coast.

The church stands on the summit of the ridge, and its lofty tower was
long an object of curiosity on account of the signals displayed on it
to indicate the arrival of ships or fleets. From ten to twenty
arbitrary signals were made, by means of differently shaped and
coloured flags, displayed from a perpendicular staff, and by balls
suspended on two others, rising at an inclined angle from the opposite
parapets.

The tardy adoption of a method, so simple and universal as that of
conveying intelligence through the combination of signals, and of
alphabetic writing, may be reckoned among the most curious anomalies
of the human mind; when the common mode of what is called talking with
the fingers actually does the thing itself, and Polybius, the friend
of P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus, and his companion, at the
destruction of Carthage, 145 years before our æra, gives a detailed
description of a method by which this object may be attained, and
dwells on its immense advantages. He admits indeed that difficulties
must be expected in the execution; but adds, “In the present age the
sciences are advanced to so great a perfection that almost every thing
is capable of being taught by method.” See the General History of
Polybius, book 10, extract 7, chapter 2. It was, however, reserved for
the French, in their Revolutionary War, to practise this art, and for
the first time in the spring of 1794, more than nineteen hundred years
after the suggestion by Polybius, and notwithstanding repeated
recurrences to nearly the same effect by various writers in modern
times.

Mr. Hals states, that in the valuation of Pope Nicholas this parish
was assessed, the Rectory at 100_s._ the Vicarage at 53_s._ 4_d._

In the folio edition of the Taxatio Ecclesiastica Angliæ et Walliæ,
auctoritate Papæ Nicholai IV. printed by command of King George III.
1802, the entries stand thus:

                               £. _s._ _d._   £. _s._ _d._
                                 Taxatio.       Decima.
            Eccl’a de Sacre    5   0    0     0  10    0
  Non ex’ { Vicar ejusdem      2  13    4       ――――――
          { Eccl’ia de Rame    2   6    8       ――――――

The bracket may perhaps be wrongly placed, and Maker may be a
corruption of the name here used.

Inceworth appears to have been the principal manor in this parish, and
belongs to the family of Trefusis; it includes Milbrook, formerly a
town of some consequence. Here were till very lately the brewhouses
attached to the great naval establishment of this port; they are now
removed to The Point on the Devonshire side, where one of the most
extensive and most useful works ever constructed for such purposes has
been recently completed. Walls have been laid in deep water, by the
use of diving bells, so as to allow of the largest ships coming quite
in contact with the wharfs, and there receiving, in the course of a
few hours, all the supplies of meat, bread, beer, water, &c. that are
requisite for their going to sea.

The object however which attracts the attention of strangers from all
others in this parish, is the place formerly called Vaultershome, and
afterwards West Stonehouse, but which Mr. Edgcumbe, who acquired it by
a marriage with the heiress of the family of Durneford, its former
possessors, chose to name Mount Edgcumbe, a proceeding now sanctioned
by time, as are those of the change from Port Prior to Port Eliot, and
some others. It would be useless to describe this most beautiful and
superb place, considered by many as altogether the finest gentleman’s
seat in the West of England. Nor can it be the least necessary to say
any thing here of the distinguished family after whom it is called;
who have possessed an hereditary seat in Parliament since the year
1741, and for two descents have been Lord Lieutenants of Cornwall.

By a strange absurdity this south-eastern extremity has been,
notwithstanding that the whole river is attached to Cornwall,
artificially considered as a part of Devonshire; but this and other
similar anomalies are in some degree corrected by modern acts of the
legislature, the authority of magistrates for any county having been
extended over these insulated portions of another, and the right of
voting for Members of Parliament is brought back to its natural state
by the enactments of 1832.

A small town or village, partly in Maker, but extending into Rame, is
distinguished by the double appellation of Kingston and Cawsand; the
latter name is applied to the bay formed by a recess of the land at
this place, a bay capable of containing the largest ships, and
esteemed the least dangerous part of Plymouth Sound.

The Harbour of Plymouth consists of three distinct parts, the Sound,
entirely exposed to the violence of south and south-western winds, and
two inner harbours, Catwater and Hamoaze; the former adapted only for
small vessels; and Hamoaze rendered utterly inaccessible in bad
weather by a ridge of rocks extending from Drake’s Island to the
western shore, thus restricting the only passage to a narrow and
winding channel round that Island under the Hoe, and between Mount
Edgcumbe and the Point.

To remedy this most essential defect, by making a safe anchorage in
the outer harbour, an immense work was commenced in August 1812, which
should be called the Artificial Reef, from its close resemblance to a
natural reef, and from its having been avowedly planned in imitation
of the coral reefs, abounding near all the Islands in the Pacific
Ocean.

The Plymouth reef consists of a middle part a thousand yards long, and
lying directly across the entrance of the Sound, and of two wings
bending inwards at a small angle, each 350 yards long, making in all
1700 yards, or very nearly a mile. Advantage having been taken of a
shoal, the depth under low water averages about 36 feet, and the
height above low water is just 20 feet. The slope towards the sea
forms an angle of 22° with the horizon, giving an increase of breadth
of nearly two feet and a half for each foot of descent; the slope
towards the land forms an angle of 33° with the horizon, and increases
one foot and a half for each foot of descent: consequently the
increase of breadth on the whole is four feet for one of descent. The
whole mass is composed of stones blown by the force of gunpowder from
limestone rocks on the river side, from whence they are rolled at once
on board barges, which sail to the spot and drop them into sea.

The whole weight of the reef is estimated at 2,500,000 tons. It may be
curious to compare it with the largest building in the world. The
Great Pyramid of Egypt measures 687 feet on each of its four sides,
and the perpendicular height is 480 feet; these dimensions, supposing
the Pyramid to be solid, give a content of 76,500,000 cubic feet, and
a weight exceeding 5,500,000 tons, more than double the weight of the
reef, and the materials are large blocks hewn into regular forms,
transported from a considerable distance by land carriage, then raised
into the air, and finally laid with cement in their exact places.

The artificial reef has cost a million of money; the Pyramid must have
required an amount of labour represented at present by perhaps twenty
times that sum, a building without use or beauty, while the reef has
made Plymouth one of the best harbours in the whole world.

  Maker measures 1867 statute acres. If the artificial arrangement
    were attended to, 967 acres must be deducted.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815, including
    the part returned as in Devonshire
    under the name of Vaultershome           3465    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           821   16    0
  Population, in 1801, in 1811, in 1821, in 1831,
       Cornwall  1691     3678     1796     1545
       Devon     1614     1569     1222     1092
                 ――――     ――――     ――――     ――――
                 3305     5247     3018     2637
  The fluctuations in the number of people are evidently caused by the
    difference of war and peace, in a parish so much blended with the
    great naval and military establishments of Plymouth.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Daniel Stephens, presented by the Lord
    Chancellor in 1796.


GEOLOGY.

The geology of Maker is not noticed by Doctor Boase; but it is
obviously the same as that of the adjacent parish, Rame, which Doctor
Boase says is composed in great measure of red and greenish grey
slate, enclosing two and three beds of compact quartzse rock. They are
all similar to the formations in St. Anthony, and in the cliffs under
Mount Edgcumbe and at Saltash; but whether they belong to the
calcareous series or to a more recent one, associated with the
fossiliferous limestone of Plymouth, remains to be ascertained.




MANACCAN.


HALS.

Manack-an, Manuc-an Rectory, is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and
hath upon the north St. Martin’s, east Haylford harbour, south St.
Anthony, west Mawgan, and Cury. For the modern name it signifies Monk
the, or the Monk, so called in memory perhaps of some religious monk
or monks that had a convent or abbey in this place.

In the Domesday Book, 1087, this district is not named, neither can I
tell under what jurisdiction it was then taxed, unless Lizart, or
Leschell, which latter may be a corruption of Kestell; neither is the
name Manackan Church of any great antiquity, for in the Inquisition of
the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, into the value of Cornish
Benefices, 1294, Ecclesia de Minster, in decanatu de Kerryer, (which
is now called Manackan) is rated £4, but in Wolsey’s Inquisition,
1521, it is called Manackan, and valued £4. 16_s._ 0½_d._ The
patronage in the Bishop of Exon; the incumbent Archer; the rectory in
possession of ―――― and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land
Tax for the year 1696, £98. 13_s._

However to the 15th of the Clergy, 24 Henry 6, it was rated, then by
the name of Minster Church, £1. 4_s._ 6_d._ afterwards abated by the
name of Minster 6_s._ (Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page 95.) And
lastly Manacan, as aforesaid; by both which names it is evident that
heretofore there was some abbey or religious house of monks in this
place or parish, wherein God was served with a minister; viz. vocal or
instrumental music in time of divine service, as that appellation in
British implies. And of this place we further read, (Carew’s Survey of
Cornwall, page 46,) the 12th Edward I. its revenues was rated for
twelve Cornish acres of land, that is to say, seven hundred and twenty
statute acres; in that book, page 44, that the Bishop of Exeter held
by tenure of knight service, in Minster in Kerrier, half a knight’s
fee of land, 3 Henry IV.; probably this Minster was some alien
monastery or priory, subjected to some abbey beyond the seas, as many
others were in this land, all dissolved by Act of Parliament, temp.
Richard II. and Henry V. for transmitting the secrets of the State to
their superior house aforesaid, in the French Wars; for which reason
perhaps it is not mentioned in the Monasticon Anglicanum, 26 Henry
VIII. when other religious houses were dissolved; neither for the like
reasons are St. Neot’s, Lancells, or St. Benet’s in Lanyvet, which I
take to be those three abbeys or priories mentioned by Dugdale and
Speed to have been dissolved in Cornwall, the value of whose revenues
they do not set down, but saith they were Black Monks of the Angells,
for Black Monks of the Augustines.

Moreover, let it be remembered that Manack is also a glove in British,
and Manackan signifies the glove.

Kes-tell, id est, a castle, probably the Reschell in the Domesday Book
aforesaid, in this parish, so called from some British camp,
intrenchment, or fortification, formerly upon the lands thereof, or
contiguous therewith, on the sea-coast, gave name and original to an
old family of gentlemen now in possession thereof, surnamed de
Kestell; and in particular John Kestell, Esq. sometime Commissioner of
the Peace and Taxes, that married Gregor of Tredenick; and giveth for
his arms in a field Or three castles Gules. Since the writing hereof
the male line of this tribe is quite extinct; and those lands, much
incumbered with debt, fallen between the two daughters of the said Mr.
Kestell, married to Penrose and Trevinard, as I am informed.


TONKIN.

The ancient name of this parish was Minster, which every one knows
doth signify in Saxon a monastery, and from thence most commonly a
church, and so it is called in the Taxatio Beneficiorum 20 Edward I.


THE EDITOR.

The ancient name of this parish, Minster, and the more recent one
Manac-an, conspire to point it out as the locality of some religious
establishment, since Manack is the Cornish word identical with Monk,
and evidently from the same root, while an is the article, but
although adjectives in all the Celtic dialects are placed after the
substantive, yet the article regularly precedes it, and this inversion
throws some doubt on the meaning of the compound word, more especially
as not the slightest trace exists of any monastic institution within
this parish in any authentic record, nor does tradition point out a
spot where the foundation of a building can be perceived.

There is not any thing worth remarking about the church; it is
pleasantly situated, and surrounded by a neat church town. The
vicarage house is good; it was honoured by the residence, during some
years, of our distinguished poet, historian, and divine, the Rev.
Richard Polwhele, till he resigned it for Newlyn, a better living,
most properly bestowed on him by Dr. Carey, then Bishop of Exeter.

The only other village of consequence in this parish is Helford, where
is a passage across the river, of greater breadth than any other in
Cornwall, and various branches of trade are conducted at this place.

Kestell was formerly the seat of a family giving or deriving their
name from this place; their arms, Or, three castles Gules, may still
be seen over the entrance to the house. The property now belongs to
Lemon of Carclew.

Halvose was for many years the summer residence of Mr. Thomas Hawkins,
of Helston; it belongs at present to the family of Grylls.

  This parish measures 1371 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2711    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           213    7    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    498   |    506   |     591    |    654
    giving an increase of 31 per cent. in 30 years.
  The parish feast is kept on the nearest Sunday to the 14th of
   October.
  The Rev. Richard Polwhele was collated to the rectory of Manaccan by
    Bishop Buller in 1794.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are similar to those of the adjacent parish
of St. Anthony, both being contained within the calcareous series.
This little parish is however mineralogically celebrated for its
streams containing a dark ferruginous sand, in which the metal
titanium was discovered by the Rev. William Gregor, and, under the
supposition of its being a new substance, received from him the name
of Manaccanite.




MARHAMCHURCH.


HALS.

Marham Church rectory, called Marwyn Church, Marwon Church, in some
old books and manuscripts, is situate in the hundred of Stratton, and
hath upon the north Stratton parish, east Bridgerule and the
Tamer river, south St. Mary Wick, west Poundstock. For the name,
it signifies without doubt the house, home, habitation, or
church-dwelling (for so the words Mar and Ham do signify in the
British, Armorican, and Scottish tongues); and by the name of
Mar-om-cerch it was taxed in the Domesday book 20 William I. 1087,
from whence it appears here was a famous endowed rectory church before
the Norman Conquest; for vicarage churches, especially in Cornwall,
sprung not up till after that time. The first of those appropriations
of the advowsons of churches that I find on record in England, is that
of William the Conqueror’s, anno Dom. 1070, who by charter granted the
patronages or advowsons of the churches of Feversham and Middleton in
Kent to the abbey of St. Austin’s in Canterbury, in these words:

     “Donatio Domini Regis Willielmi Anglorum de Ecclesiis
     Feveresham et de Middeltone.

     “In nomine sancte et individue Trinitatis, Patris et Filii
     et Spiritus Sancti. Amen. Ego Willielmus ineffabili Dei
     providentiâ Rex Anglorum, ex hiis que omnipotens Deus sua
     gratia mihi largiri est dignatus, quædam concedo ecclesiæ
     Sancti Augustini Anglorum Apostoli, que sita est in suburbio
     urbis Cantuarie, pro salute anime mee, et parentum meorum,
     predecessorum, et successorum hereditario jure.

     “Hec sunt Ecclesie et decime duarum mansionum videlicet
     Faversham et Middeltona, ex omnibus redditibus que mihi
     redduntur ex hiis mansionibus, et omnibus ibidem
     appendentibus, terra, silva, pratis, et aqua, exceptis
     decima mellis et gabbi-denariorum. Hec omnia ex integro
     concedo sancto Augustino et Abbati et fratribus, ut habeant,
     teneant, possideant imperpetuum. Si quis autem huic nostræ
     donationi contraire presumpserit, anathemati subjacebit.

     “Facta est hec Donatio in villa que dicitur Wyndesor anno
     Incarnationis Domini Millesimo septuagesimo. Testibus,
     Episcopo Golfrydo de Seynt Loth. et Willielmo Tremle
     Londoniensi, et Hugone de Port, et aliis ejus quamplurimis
     optimatibus.”

Which grant was afterwards confirmed by Pope Alexander the Third, and
ratified by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, together with an
establishment and ordination of a vicarage by the said archiepiscopal
authority in each of the said churches respectively. Afterwards King
Edward III. 1349, appropriated to the same Abbey three other church
advowsons, viz. Wivelsberge, Stone, and Brockland in Kent, ratified
and confirmed by Pope Clement the Fifth’s bull, and by Simon Mepham,
then Archbishop of Canterbury, with the establishment of three
perpetual vicarages in those churches.

Of these sort of vicarage churches appropriated to Bishops, Deans, and
Chapters, Abbots, Colleges, and Priories, there are in England about
three thousand eight hundred and forty-five, in Cornwall one hundred
and twenty-two; most of them endowed with glebe lands and small
tithes, except about fifteen of them wholly impropriate, the vicar
subsisting only on a small salary or stipend by custom or
subscription.

Wales-bury, i. e. the Wales or Welsh burying, or the place where some
Welsh tribe lived and had their burying place or were interred, was
another manor or lordship, under which jurisdiction this district was
taxed 20 William I. 1087, from whence was denominated an ancient
family of gentlemen surnamed de Walesbury, who flourished here in
worshipful degree and great affluence of wealth for many generations
till the latter end of the reign of King Edward IV.; at which time,
the issue male failing, this estate fell amongst daughters, one of
which was married to Trevillian, who was no small advancer of the fame
and wealth of that family. Of this family Thomas Walesbury was Sheriff
of Cornwall 20 Henry VI. when William Wadham was Sheriff of Devon;
Thomas Walesbury, his son, was Sheriff of Cornwall 32 Henry VI. when
John Cheyney was Sheriff of Devon; his son John Walesbury was Sheriff
of Cornwall 37 Henry VI. when Richard Hals, of Kenedon, was Sheriff of
Devon. The arms of Walesbury were, Argent, a fess lozengy Gules.

Lang-ford-hill, in this parish, gave name and original to an old
family of gentlemen surnamed de Langford; and in particular, Humphrey
Langford, Esq. Commissioner for the Peace and Taxes [was] in
possession [of Langford Hill] tempore Charles II. and giveth for his
arms, in a field ―――― a lion rampant. The which gentleman aforesaid had
issue only daughters, one of which was lately married to her kinsman
Walter Langford, of Swadle Downes in Devon, Esq. now in possession of
this place.

In this parish liveth Alexander Cottle, Gent. who married Hawkey, his
father Cosowarth.


TONKIN.

The name Marhamchurch is only an abbreviation of St. Morewen’s Church
from St. Morwen, to whom it is dedicated.

It is a rectory valued in the King’s books at 15_l._ 11_s._ having
never been appropriated.

Anno 1291, 20th Edward I. this church was valued at 6_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._

The manor, Marwyn Church.――This is in Domesday book named Marone
Church, and was one of the manors given by William the Conqueror to
Robert Earl of Morton.

In the 3d of Henry IV. Herbert de Pyn held in Marwen Church one
knight’s fee.


THE EDITOR.

The church of this parish has the appearance of being very ancient; it
contains several monuments to former residents on the principal
estates.

Mr. Lysons says, that the manor of Marham Church has been in the
families of Pyne, Stafford, and Rolles; from the last it has descended
to Trefusis.

That the manor of Walesborough gave name to an ancient family residing
there, from whom it went with an heiress to the family of Trevelyan,
from whom it was purchased by the late Mr. Justice Buller, and now
belongs to his grandson.

Mr. Lysons further states, that the manor of Hilton, also in this
parish, was held jointly by the families of Cobham, Carminow, and
Botreaux; that it subsequently came into the possession of a Rolle,
and now belongs to the Rev. John Kingdon.

Wood-Knowle was formerly the residence of the Rolles, probably of the
branch which came possessed of Hilton; it is now the residence of the
Rev. Henry Badcock.

The Rev. John Kingdon is Patron of the rectory, and the present
incumbent, instituted in 1818.

The whole parish is fertile, variegated by hill and dale, and
moreover, notwithstanding its maritime situation, abounds with trees,
so that the prospect is every where interesting, and the church,
almost inclosed in a grove, presents a very pleasing object.

  Marhamchurch measures 2,392 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          2,485    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           339     3    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    414   |    448   |     647    |    659
    giving an increase of 59 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Doctor Boase says of the geology, that the whole rests on massive and
schistose varieties of dunstone, a member of the calcareous series,
similar to what may be found in the adjoining parishes of Launcells,
Bayton, and Kilkhampton.




ST. MARTIN’S, NEAR LOOE.


HALS.

St. Martin’s rectory is situate in the hundred of West, and hath upon
the north Morvall by Looe, south and west the British Channel and Looe
Haven, east Seaton River and St. Germans.

This parish is denominated from the church thereof, as it is from its
tutelar guardian and patron St. Martin, Bishop of Tours in France,
which was a famous endowed rectory church before the Norman Conquest,
as is testified by the Domesday book in Cornwall 20 William I. 1087,
wherein we read, Lant Martin, i. e. Martin’s church, chapel, or
temple, now turned to St. Martin.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the
value of Cornish Benefices 1294, Ecclesia de Sancto Martino in
decanatu de West, was valued 9_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition
1521, St. Martin juxta Looe 36_l._ The patronage in the Duke of
Bolton; the Incumbent Hancock. The Parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound
Land Tax 1696, 178_l._ 17_s._ 5_d._; East Looe town, within its
precincts, 53_l._ 9_s._; in all 222_l._ 6_s._ 5_d._

Within this parish stands the borough town of East Looe, that is to
say, the town that stands on the east side of the River Looe; for as
loo, looe, lough, in the old Scots and Irish tongues and the French,
signifies a lough, a lake, or pool of water, so it is sometimes used
in the same sense in old British. East and West Looe towns, situate in
the Looe Haven or harbour thereof, afford opportunities to the
inhabitants for foreign and domestic trades and merchandizes to be
imported and exported, to their no small advantage. In which town of
East Looe there is a chapel or oratory for divine service, wherein the
rector of St. Martin’s, or his curate, officiates on Sundays for
convenience of its inhabitants. It was of old a privileged manor by
prescription, all which was confirmed by a charter from Queen
Elizabeth, the 29th year of her reign, whereby it was also
incorporated by the name of the Mayor and free Burgesses, consisting
of a Mayor and eight chief Burgesses or Council, the two Members of
Parliament elected by the majority of them. It is also privileged with
administration of justice within the liberties or precincts thereof,
as also with a market on Saturday weekly, and fairs on the 2d of
February and the 29th of September yearly.

The arms of this town are a gallot (high ship) in the sea, rigged with
ropes and yard, bearing three escutcheons, each charged with the arms
of De Bodrugan.

The writ to remove an action of law, depending in this Court Leet of
East Looe, to a superior; and the precept for election of Members of
Parliament from the Sheriff must be thus directed: “Majori et
Burgensibus Burgi sui de East Looe, in comitatu Cornubiæ, et eorum
cuilibet, salutem.”

The history of Kevorall is by mistake placed under St. Germans, a
contiguous parish, only parted by the Lynar or Seaton river, which
should be placed here.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has not any thing relative to this parish or town, but a
long quotation from Browne Willis, wholly uninteresting; and a
conjecture that the chapel at Looe is dedicated to St. Kenna, usually
pronounced St. Kayne, adding as a confirmation, that her festival is
kept on the 30th of September, and that on the eve of that day a fair
is established in the town.


THE EDITOR.

It will be unnecesary to enter on any details respecting either St.
Martin’s parish or Looe, since every thing curious or interesting may
be found in a most excellent work: “Topographical and Historical
Sketches of the Boroughs of East and West Looe, in the County of
Cornwall, with an account of the Natural and Artificial Curiosities,
and Picturesque Scenery of the Neighbourhood. By Thomas Bond, Esq.
London, printed by and for J. Nichols and Son, 25, Parliament Street.”

Since Mr. Bond’s work was published, both Looes have lost the
privilege of sending Members to Parliament; and it is said that a
spirit of active exertion has already superseded the listless reliance
on patronage which used to characterize small borough towns.

A canal has also been constructed to Leskeard, since the time of Mr.
Bond’s publication, promising to diffuse cultivation and fertility
over districts previously inaccessible to manure; and now at its
commencement the canal transports coal, lime, and other bulky
commodities, to such an extent as to amply repay the sums expended on
its formation.

Another plan of a great work is in agitation, likely to render this
beautiful and romantic neighbourhood the resort of strangers from all
parts of the kingdom. Cornwall is stretched out into the sea by an
interrupted chain of granite hills, extending from Dartmoor to the
Land’s End. The valleys follow a general course on either side,
transverse to the granite chain; so that to avoid the perpetual
recurrence of steep declivities, the main road has been carried along
the middle line, above the formation of the valleys, or, as it is
termed, on the backbone of the ridge, over a most uncultivated and
dreary tract.

It is now proposed, in consequence of the safe conveyance at all times
by steam across the Tamar river from Plymouth, and in humble imitation
of the road connecting France and Italy by the maritime Alps, to
convey a new line of road along the face of the cliffs, over the
debouches of the vallies, and across the Looe and Fowey rivers on
lofty bridges, thus to avoid the hills, and to shorten the distance
nine miles between Tor Point and St. Austell; but the very large
expense may possibly defeat the execution of a plan, which, in
addition to the essential advantages already stated, would lead
travellers to Falmouth, or to any part of the west of Cornwall,
through a district as beautiful, as that which the road now traverses
is unsightly and uncouth.

The situation of East Looe is at once singular and pleasing. The two
rivers, uniting about half a mile above the bridge, expand into a
lake, loch, or low, evidently bestowing its name on the towns, and are
then contracted into comparatively a narrow channel by the near
approach of two steep hills. A beach has nevertheless been formed on
the eastern and least precipitous side, by the meeting of the sea with
the descending stream; and on this beach, secured by artificial
mounds, and on the slope of the hill, East Looe is built.

Perhaps the only other addition that I can make to Mr. Bond’s work is
to state that he himself has been the chief ornament of Looe for many
years past, and that his ancestors may be found among the mayors and
aldermen of the corporation, up to the period when the charter was
given to the town.

Mr. Hals has detailed at great length the history of St. Martin of
Tours, the undoubted patron of this parish.

It may be sufficient to state a few particulars of this far-famed
personage. He was born in Hungary, of parents elevated in life, and
commenced his early career in the Roman army, but afterwards became an
ecclesiastic, having obtained celebrity, influence, and power, by
adopting the most baneful of all practical heresies, founded on a
belief that the favour of the Almighty may be effectually obtained by
reversing the order established by his Divine Providence, and
bestowing on idleness, profligacy, and vice, the legitimate rewards of
industry, frugality, and care; in consequence, he became the favourite
of rogues, thieves, vagrants, and impostors, and has continued so in
Catholic countries to the present time. A part of his high reputation
has however been derived from a more pure source. He supported the
orthodox faith against the Arians, who at that period are supposed to
have more than numerically divided the Christian Church.

The most absurd and ridiculous legends are related of this Saint by
his disciple St. Sulpicius, and by other writers. In one of these it
is said that our Saviour himself appeared to him on a cold winter’s
night, under the disguise of a half naked wandering beggar; and that
Martin, then a soldier, not having any thing else to bestow, divided
his cloak with a sword, and gave one portion of it to the supposed
mendicant. In another, setting at defiance the precept “Thou shalt not
tempt the Lord thy God,” he allowed himself to be fastened with cords,
immediately under the inclining trunk of a tree, as workmen were
dividing the roots; but just as the tree was about to fall on him, he
signed it with the sign of the cross, when instantly the trunk
ascended, and reached the ground in an opposite direction. Raising
people from the dead, and resisting personal temptations of the devil,
appear to have been frequent and ordinary occurrences. He died at
Tours, in the odour of sanctity, in the year 397, having held the
bishoprick 26 years. The festival in honour of St. Martin is kept on
the 11th of November, but parish feasts are not observed in the
eastern parts of Cornwall.

The advowson of this living, appurtenant to the manor of Pendrym, came
to the family of Paulet, through the same succession as that which
brought Ludgvan Lease, including the high lordship of St. Ives; and a
peculiar although well-known relationship having continued to exist
between the two properties, the learned Mr. Jonathan Toup was
translated from the borough town to this rectory in the year 1751,
where he died, Jan. 19, 1785. A monument has been erected to Mr.
Toup’s memory by the Delegates of the Oxford Press, and he is there
related to have been born in Dec. 1713. Mr. Toup has been mentioned
under St. Ives, the place of his birth.

There are other monuments:――to Walter Langdon, of Keveril, stated to
be the last of his race; to Philip Maiowe, probably ancestor of John
Mayo, or Mayow, M.D. Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, and
afterwards Physician at Bath[3]; also to the Rev. Stephen Midhope,
sometime Rector of this parish, who died in the year 1636; but this
gentleman, hurried away by the whirl of fanatical opinions, growing
out of the Reformation, had resigned his living some years before, on
professing himself an Anabaptist.

  This parish measures 2,719 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.   _s._   _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815:
              The parish                     3469    0    0
              East Looe                       921    0    0
                                            ―――――   ――   ――
                                            £4390    0    0
                                            ―――――   ――   ――
  Poor Rate in 1831:
              The parish                      231   19    0
              East Looe                       325    5    0
                                            ―――――   ――   ――
                                             £557    4    0

  Population, in 1801, in 1811, in 1821, in 1831,
    The parish    344      343      411      455
    East Looe     467      608      770      865
                 ――――     ――――     ――――     ――――
                  811      951     1181     1320
    giving an increase on the parish of 32 per cent.⎫
                              East Looe 42 per cent.⎬ In 30 years.
                              both      39 per cent.⎭


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish entirely resembles St. Germans, to which it is contiguous.


     [3] One of the most eminent chemists and natural
     philosophers of his age.




ST. MARTIN’S IN MENEAGE.


HALS.

St. Martin’s Rectory is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, hath upon
the north and east Helford Channel and Constenton, south Manaccan and
St. Kevorn, west Mawgan: under what jurisdiction this parish was taxed
in the Domesday Book in 1087 I know not. In the Inquisition of the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, into the value of Cornish Benefices
in Cornwall, 1294, Ecclesia de Sancti Martini in decanatude Kerryer,
was valued at £4. 6_s._ 8_d._ At or before the time of Wolsey’s
Inquisition, 1521, it was consolidated into its superior or mother
church St. Mawgan, and therefore not mentioned by itself. I take it to
have been founded and endowed by the Prior of St. Michael’s Mount, who
formerly was patron of both, now Trevillian; the incumbent Trewinard;
and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, £105.
15_s._

Tremayne, that is the town of stone, or the stone town, in this
parish, is the dwelling of an old family of gentlemen, surnamed Thoms
or Tomys, Anglice Thomas; so called after the Cornish-British manner,
after the font name of some of their ancestors. Of which family was
Robert Thomy, who held by the tenure of knight’s service half a
knight’s fee at Bliston, in Trigshire, now Blissland, temp. Henry IV.
(Mr. Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page 42). Also one little knight’s
fee at Carnanton, in Pedyr, idem liber, page 43. The present
posssessor is ―――― Thoms, and giveth for his arms, in a field
Argent, a chevron between three talbots Sable. From this family, as I
am informed, by younger brothers sprang, from their dwellings at
Carveth and Carnsew in Mabe, and Roscrow in Gluvias, three families,
who were transnominated after the names of those places, from Thoms to
Carveth, and Roscrow, and Carnsew, who in testimony thereof ever gave
their arms as aforesaid as Thoms did.

Mudgan in this parish, is the corruption of Muchan, as I  take it,
which signifies a short chimney,[4] with a lovour or chimney-hole
through the top of the house for the smoke. From whence was
denominated a family of gentlemen, surnamed Mugaun, or Mudgan, whose
sole inheritrix was married to Chynoweth, of Chynoweth, in St. Earth,
temp. Queen Mary, that is new house, so called from a new house, the
first of this name, built in that parish, when he parted with his old
lands and name of Trevillizik there, (now Tre-liz-ik) which signifies
the water gulf, creek, town, as situate upon the sea banks or cliff,
which affords a bad passage over the Hayle river, at low water, for
passengers on foot or horseback. The last gentleman of this family,
viz. Anthony Chynoweth, that married Trevillian, dying without issue,
his brother John Chynoweth’s three daughters, by Lannar, succeeded to
his estate and became his heirs; who were married to Banfeild,
Dunscomb, and Trelevan, lately in possession of Mudgan, and other
lands of value; which I hear is by them all spent through luxury and
ill-conduct.

The arms of Chynoweth are Sable, on a fess Or, three eagle’s heads
erased Gules.


TONKIN.

This parish is so called from the famous St. Martin of Tours. It is a
daughter church to Mawgan, and valued in the King’s Books at £5.
10_s._ 8_d._ where the parish is designated St. Martin alias Dedimus.

The patronage in Trevelyan; the incumbent Mr. William Whiting, who
succeeded Mr. James Trewinnard.


THE EDITOR.

This parish presents very little worthy of notice except Tremayne,
which gave origin to both branches of the honourable and respected
family, which flourished at Sydenham in Devonshire, and at Heligan in
this county. The place is situated on the southern bank of Helford
river. Mr. Lysons states that it passed with an heiress from the
family of Tremayne to Reskymer. It has been frequently sold in recent
times.

Mr. Hals mentions a Nunnery at a farm in this parish, called
Hellnoweth, which Mr. Lysons says did belong to the Monastery of St.
Michael’s Mount; but there is not the slightest trace to be found in
any authentic work of a separate establishment having ever existed
there; although Mr. Hals is so confident of it, as fancifully to
derive the word Meneage from Menales, a supposed appellation of the
nuns. All the parishes in the Lizard district, bounded by the Helford
River and the Looe Pool, are said to be in Meneage, although no such
division is recognised for any civil or ecclesiastical purpose. Under
a supposition that this parish might be dedicated to St. Martin, pope
and martyr, Mr. Hals has given his history at great length, which is
omitted as being wholly uninteresting, as well as irrelevant, since
the parish feast is kept on the nearest Sunday to Nov. the 11th, the
well-known festival of St. Martin of Tours. Some notice is taken of
this Pope under Gulval, where he is honoured as the patron Saint. He
was not born till about an hundred and fifty years after the death of
St. Martin of Tours.

  This parish measures 2023 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2306    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           193   11    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    336   |    391   |     504    |    508
    giving an increase of 51 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The south-western corner of this parish near the Dry Tree, (a mark on
Goonhilly Downs) is situated on serpentine; the remainder of the
parish belongs to the calcareous series, corresponding with Manaccan,
and the other parishes immediately bordering on the Helford river.


     [4] From mog, or moge, smoke.




ST. MAWGAN IN MENEAGE.


HALS.

St. Mawgan rectory is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and hath upon
the north Gwendron and Helston, south Cury and St. Martin’s, west
Gonwallo. Under what jurisdiction this parish was rated in the
Domesday Tax, 1087, I know not, probably under the names of Gwendron,
Helleston, Lizard, or Trevery; for the modern names of St. Mawgan, or
Maneage, were not then heard of. However, at the time of the
Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, into the
value of Cornish Benefices, Ecclesia de Sancti Mawgani in decanatu de
Kerryer, is valued £10. In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, Ecclesias de
St. Maugani in decanatu de Kerrier, £35. 10_s._ 0½_d._; the patronage
formerly in the Prior of St. Michael’s Mount, who as I am informed
endowed it, now Trevillian; the incumbent Trewinard; and the parish
rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, £148. 8_s._

This district of Meneage is a kind of peninsula, formed between the
lakes or rivers Looe and Hayle, conjoined at the neck only by a little
part of this parish of Mawgan with that of Gwendron and Helleston;
from whence further south in length and breadth, the land shooteth in
towards the British Ocean, in the several parishes of St. Martin’s,
Manaccan, St. Anthony, Kevorne, Ruan Major, Ruan Minor, Landawednack,
Grade, Cury, Mullyan, Gonwallo. Which peninsula is further notable for
its great fertility between the rocks for corn and grass; for as at
St. Kevorne and other parishes, if wheat corn be seasonably tilled and
well manured, it will produce commonly in the beginning of July a
harvest of twenty bushels Cornish measure, that is to say sixty
bushels Winchester to a Cornish acre of land; so in like manner this
neck of land, being the most south-west part of this island of
Britain, and situate between two seas, will in ten weeks time after
the sowing of barley, produce a harvest in many places of much greater
increase than that of wheat aforesaid. Moreover, it is also profitable
for breeding and feeding bullocks and sheep of all sorts; and
particularly Gon-hilly Downs, id est the Hunting Downs, is notable for
the breed of an under-statute sort of mares and horses, swift and sure
of foot, and of great strength and hardiness for travel and labour.
Which Downs consist of many hundred acres of land, all overspread with
grey cloos, or a kind of marble stones as aforesaid.

The barton and manor of Carmenow, Car-mynow, Carminou, in this parish,
words of one import, is the rockhill or mountain, a name given and
taken from the natural circumstances of the place, viz. lands situate
upon the rocks and hills abutting upon the sea-cliff of the British
channel, and the Looe creek or cove therof. I know, contrary to this
etymology, Mr. Carew tells us that Carminow is a little city, p. 55
Surv. Cornwall. But Caer-Vyan, or Caer-Byan, or Vyan-Caer, is a little
city in Cornish; Caer-Broas, Bruse, a great, large, or extensive city.
Again, page 142, he tells us that the interpretation of Car-mynow is
often-loving; from which contradictory or cross etymology of this
compound word aforesaid, it is evident he knew very little of the
language of our ancestors the Britons, as his successor Mr. Camden did
much less.

This local place gave name and original to an old British family of
gentlemen surnamed de Carmynow, now extinct, who flourished there for
many generations in great fame and riches; in particular here lived
Robert de Carmynow, who held £16 per annum by the tenure of knight
service, who was summoned by writ, 48 Henry III. to come and take his
degree of knighthood. (Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page 50.) This
gentleman, as tradition saith, accompanied King Edward I. in the Holy
War in Palestine. He had issue Ralph Carmenow, said to be Chamberlain
to King Edward II.; who had issue Ralph Carmenow, Sheriff of Cornwall
2 Richard II. 1379. Betwixt whom and the Lord Richard Scrope, of
Bolton Castle, in Richmondshire, Lord Chancellor of England temp.
Edward III. (father of William Lord Scrope, Earl of Wiltshire and Lord
Treasurer of England 21 Richard II. and Knight of the Garter, beheaded
at Bristol for attainder of treason against Henry IV. anno Dom. 1399,)
happened a memorable trial in the Court of Chivalry, or Earl Marshal’s
Court, about the bearing on their shields, or coat armour, viz. Azure,
a bend Or.

In this action the Lord Scrope was plaintiff, who declared that he was
lineally descended from one Scrope, a French or Norman soldier, that
came over into England under the banner and conduct of William the
Conqueror, against King Harold, anno Dom. 1066; and that he gave for
his arms, (portoit) d’Azur, à la band d’Or; and that his posterity
till that instant (1360) ever gave the same arms, and to corroborate
this their bearing, they produced a copy of the record thereof in the
Earl Marshal’s Court; therefore Mr. Carmenow’s thus assuming and
bearing their proper arms, it was contrary to law, and equity, and
arms.

To this declaration the defendant pleaded not guilty, and in
justification of the bearing aforesaid, said that his ancestors were
Cornish Britons; and lived at Carmenow long before the Norman
Conquest; and particularly, that one of them was sent by King Edward
the Confessor an ambassador, either to the French King or Duke of
Normandy; who gave those arms in and for his device, or shield; and
that from that time to the time of King Edward III. aforesaid, which
was about three hundred years, his posterity had ever given or borne
the same arms, without interruption or alteration.

To this the plaintiff rejoined, that there was then no such public
record extant in the Office of Arms, or Marshal’s Court, that
appropriated any such bearing to this name or family of Carmenow,
neither was the Provincial Herald called Clarencieux, for granting
arms and recording the descents of private gentlemen for the
south-west part of England, instituted but just before this action;
and therefore, if the said Ralph Carmenow, or his ancestors, gave
those arms, they were only personal badges or devices that terminated
with their lives, and could not be hereditary or descend to posterity.
And further it was alleged that in case Carmenow’s ancestor lived at
Carmenow before the Norman Conquest, those arms could not be
appropriated to him by the name of de Carmenow, for it was not the
custom of the Britons till about a hundred years after, to style
themselves from local places with the Latin pronoun or particle, De,
after the manner of the French. But before were generally
distinguished by the names John Mac Richard, Richard Mac Thomas,
Robert ap Ralph, &c. that is to say the son of Thomas, Robert, and
Ralph, according to their lineal descents.

Whereupon, after a full view and hearing of what could be said and
shown on either part, by learned council as to records, manuscripts,
deeds and pedigrees, the Earl Marshal, in Westminster Hall, gave
judgment for the plaintiff; and the definitive sentence was afterwards
made and signed with the public seal of that Court, and read in open
audience; and orders given to the Sub-Marshal to put the same in
execution; which was, that Carmenow should never more give the arms
aforesaid without a label of three points Gules for a distinction;
when accordingly the same was first entered of record in Clarencieux,
or the Provincial Herald’s books, as the subsequent hereditary coat
armour of his family, (and as tradition saith Carmenow paid costs,)
which rule was ever after by those gentlemen observed in their
bearings.

And though Carmenow’s friends pleased themselves in this distinction
of a label, because given by the Emperor of Rome’s son and heir whilst
his father was alive; and for that it is the mark or cognizance of the
eldest son and heir of a family of the greatest degree; yet it is
manifest Carmenow himself was so distasted therewith, that he chose
for the motto of this new bearing arms, a Cornish sentence which
abundantly expressed his dislike thereof: Cala rag Ger da, id est, a
straw for fame, or breath.

William Carmenow, his son and heir, married the sole daughter and heir
of Rawleigh, of Smallridge, in Devon, and was Sheriff of that County
14th of Richard II.; he had issue by her Thomas Carmenow, Sheriff of
Cornwall 2 Henry VI. He or his son was also Sheriff of Cornwall the
8th of Henry VIII.; who had issue William Carmenow, father of John,
whose daughters and heirs were married to Arundell of Lanherne, and
Sir John Reskymer, of Reskymer, Knight. This John Carmenow suffered
the barton and manor of Carmenow, with other lands, to go in marriage
with his two daughters and heirs, married as aforesaid; whilst the
greatest part of his ancient estate, by virtue of the entail, after
his decease descended to his younger brother, John Carmenow, of
Fentongollan, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 5 Henry VIII.

In this local place of Carmenow those gentlemen had their ancient
domestic chapel and burying place, the walls and windows whereof are
still to be seen; in which place also formerly stood the tombs and
funeral monuments of divers once notable persons of this family; of
which sort, in the beginning of King James the First’s reign, when
this chapel was left to run to ruin and decay, the inhabitants of this
parish of Mawgan, out of respect to the memory of those gentlemen,
brought from thence two funeral monuments in human shape, at full
length, made of alabaster, freestone, or marble, man and woman I take
it, curiously wrought and cross-legged, with two lions couchant under
their feet, and deposited or lodged them in this parish church of St.
Mawgan, where they are yet to be seen, though the inscriptions and
coat armour thereof are now obliterated and defaced by time. Now,
though it was the custom to form the funeral monuments of such as had
been in the Holy War temp. Richard I. and Edward I. cross-legged, yet
I find that posture of monuments for the dead was much more ancient,
and placed on the tombs of such as had never been in the Holy War, in
memory of the cross whereon our Blessed Saviour suffered for our
redemption and salvation. Lastly, it is further observable of this
family of Carmenow, that, notwithstanding their great estate,
gentility, and antiquity, they never had any higher title of honour or
dignity conferred upon them by our English Kings than that of Knights
Bachelors, of which sort two or three of them had been knights. This
family was possest of five knight’s fees of land temp. Henry IV.; in
Trewint, in Lesnewith, also in Moteland there, also in Hernecoft in
Stratton hundred, also in Merthyn and Winenton in Kerrier; by
computation four thousand acres of land of this tenure. (See Carew’s
Survey of Cornwall.)

Res-ky-mer, in this parish, was the seat of Rogerus de Reskymer, a
military man or officer for conduct of the new levies for France, 15
Edward III. (Survey of Cornwall, page 52.)

Richardus de Reskymer, probably his son, was one of those forty-nine
Cornish gentlemen that held lands by the tenure of knight service, or
grand sergeanty, by attending the King personally in his wars, with a
horse and arms furnished according to his degree. See the writ
directed to the Sheriff of Cornwall for that purpose, commanding him
to attend him in his wars in France, 25 Edward III. (Carew’s Survey of
Cornwall, page 51.) He held by the same tenure above £20 lands per
annum.

John Reskymer married Alice, the second daughter and heir of John
Densill, Esq. Sergeant-at-Law, about the year 1508, and had issue by
her Sir John Reskymer, Knight, that married ―――― one of the coheirs of
John Carmenow, of Carmenow, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 31 Henry VIII.;
who had issue by her, as I am informed, John Reskymer, Esq. Sheriff of
Cornwall 3 and 4 of Queen Mary; who married Seyntaubyn, by whom he had
issue only four daughters, that became his heirs; married to Trelawney
of Poole, Lower of St. Wenow, Vyvyan of Trelowarren, and Courtenay of
Trethyrfe; in whose families the name, blood, and estate of those
Reskymers are terminated; though now this Reskimer barton is the lands
and possessions of Pendarves of Roscrow, as I am informed, and
purchased by Mr. Basset, who gave for their arms, in allusion to part
of their name, in a field Azure three bars Argent, in chief a wolf or
wild dog passant of the First.

Tre-lo-warren, alias Talla-warren. In this place, as appears from Mr.
Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page 42, 3 Henry IV. one Mathew de
Trethake held by tenure of knight service half a knight’s fee of land,
from whose heir I suppose it came by purchase or marriage to Ferrers;
but whether those gentlemen were descended from the Ferrers of Tutbury
Castle, in Staffordshire, whose ancestor came out of France, a
collateral under William the Conqueror, 1066, (who gave for his arms,
sex ferres de cheval de Sable,) or from the Ferrers of Newton Ferrers,
in the county of Devon, (who gave for their arms, Argent, a bend
Gules, and a chief Vert,) I know not. However, there is yet extant, in
the stone wall of the tower of St. Mawgan, cut in chief in the same,
the 1st the arms of Carmenow, 2d of Reskymer, 3d Ferrers, 4th Vyvyan;
by which arms this family may be distinguished.

Originally the Vyvyans were possessed of Trevederne in Buryan, as they
still are; and from thence matched with the daughter and heir of
Skyburiow, afterwards with the daughter and heir of Ferrers of
Trelowarren; which first brought those lands into the possession of
Vyvyan; particularly as I am informed Richard Vyvyan, Esq. Sheriff of
Cornwall 9 Henry VII. 1494; Richard Vyvyan, Esq. his son, was Sheriff
of Cornwall 20 Henry VIII; Michael Vyvyan, Esq. was Sheriff of
Cornwall 22 of Henry VIII.; Hanniball Vyvyan, Esq. was Sheriff of
Cornwall 43 of Elizabeth; whose son, Frances Vyvyan, Esq. afterwards
knighted, was Sheriff of Cornwall 15 James I. who built the house now
extant at Trelowarren, and married one of the coheirs of Vyell, of
Trevorder. His son, Richard Vyvyan, Esq. afterwards, 12 February 1644,
by King Charles I. was created the 384th Baronet of England, married
Bulteel, and had issue by her Sir Vyell Vyvyan, Baronet, afterwards
knighted by King Charles II.; who married Thomasin, daughter and heir
of James Robins, of Penryn, Gent. Attorney-at-Law, who died without
issue; afterwards he married Jane, daughter of Thomas Melhuish, of
Penryn, Gent. the relict of Michael Cood, but died without issue that
lived. Note that the name Melhuish is local, viz. from the barton or
tenement of Melhuish, near Kirton in Devon, which signifies a
lark-bird, or larks, as alauda.

After Sir Vyell Vyvyan’s decease, his nephew Sir Richard Vyvyan,
Baronet, that succeeded to his estate and honour, son and heir of
Charles Vyvyan, Esq. Barrister-at-Law, (younger brother of Sir Vyell
aforesaid) by Erisey, married Mary, daughter and heir of Francis
Vivian, of Cosowarth, Esq. by Anne, daughter and heir of Henry Mynors,
of St. Enedor, Gent. by Bridget, the only surviving child of Sir
Samuel Cosowarth, Knight, and sole heir to her brother Nicholas
Cosowarth, Esq. that died without issue temp. Charles II. By the which
Mary Vyvian, his lady, Sir Richard is now in possession of Cosowarth
and Vivian’s lands.

Sir Richard Vyvyan, Bart. first mentioned, had also issue by Bulteel
five daughters, married to Robinson, Trewren, &c.

The arms of this family are in a field Argent, a lion rampant Gules.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has not any thing of the least consequence different from
Mr. Hals.


THE EDITOR.

It is curious that this parish should have afforded residences to
three families so distinguished as Carminow, Reskymer, and Vyvyan. The
two first have been long extinct; Vyvyan still continues one of the
first in Cornwall.

Sir Richard Vyvyan, mentioned by Mr. Hals, adhered to what was thought
by many in those days to be the good old cause of the Cavaliers and
the Restoration of Charles the Second; and in consequence King George
the First and his ministry, excusing themselves perhaps by the
authority,

     Res dura, et regni novitas me talia cogunt Moliri,

not only removed all their suspected opponents from the commission of
the peace, and from places of trust, but committed several to prison.
Among others Sir Richard Vyvyan, who was seized in his house at
Trelowarren, conveyed by water to Pendennis Castle, and removed from
thence to the Tower.

A story is related of a king’s messenger having been detained at an
inn called Hallworthy, east of Camelford, while an adherent reached
Trelowarren, and enabled Sir Richard Vyvyan to destroy many documents,
which might have proved his being adverse, as well as many other
Cornish gentlemen, to the new government.

As the persons then in power failed of being able to prove any overt
acts taken against themselves, they were obliged to discharge this
gentleman out of custody; but not till he had a daughter, Ann Vyvyan,
born in the Tower, whom the Editor well remembers; and Sir Richard
Vyvyan was, as a matter of course, chosen one of the representatives
for the county at the next election, which situation he had however
held in some former Parliaments.

He married Mary, only daughter and heir of Vyvyan of Cosowarth, in the
parish of Little Colan, and left a numerous family.

His eldest son, Vyel Vyvyan, married Mary, daughter and heiress of the
Rev. Carew Hoblyn, and left two sons, Richard, who married Jane,
daughter of Christopher Hawkins, Esq. of Trewinnard, and of Mary,
coheiress of the Hawkinses of Penzance:――they had not any family; and
Carew the second son, a clergyman, never married.

Richard, the second son of Sir Richard Vyvyan, married the heiress of
the family of Piper, and settled at their seat called Modford, almost
in the town of Launceston. Their eldest son Philip, married Mary, the
daughter and heiress of Sheldon Walter, Esq. and through her mother
heiress of the Medlands, of Tremail, in South Petherwin. Their son,
Vyel, succeeded to the family estate, and having married Mary,
daughter of Thomas Hutton Rawlinson, of Lancaster, Esq. has been
succeeded by his eldest son, Sir Richard Rawlinson Vyvyan, of whom it
may be sufficient to say, that, having been very early in life elected
member for the county of Cornwall, he so distinguished himself in
Parliament as to receive an invitation from all the leading gentlemen
of Bristol, to represent their city, when a difference of political
opinion severed him from the constituent body of Cornwall, and that he
has twice obtained the honour of being elected Member for the second
city in England.

Trelowarren alone remains of the seats in this parish, and it amply
compensates for the disappearance of the others. No place in the
county, excepting perhaps Penhale in Egloskerry, comes into comparison
with Trelowarren, as a gentleman’s residence in the style of former
times. The house is believed to be more ancient than the time assigned
to it by Mr. Hals, and that Mr. Francis Vyvyan only repaired and
possibly enlarged a building at the least as old as the possession of
the Ferrers. Sir Richard Vyvyan almost entirely reconstructed the
interior of the house, soon after the year 1750, and great
improvements have been made by the present proprietor, and by his
father. Doctor Borlase has given a view of the house, page 86 of his
Natural History.

The manor of Carminow continued long in the family of Arundell: it is
now by purchase the property of the Rev. John Rogers.

A detailed account of the curious trial before the judges of the Court
of Chivalry, and ultimately before the King himself in person,
relative to the arms borne by the Carminows, has been given in
“Anecdotes of heraldry,” published by a lady about thirty years since.
The decision of the King is there stated to be, that each claimant
should bear the arms without differences. The motto given by Mr. Hals
is literally in Cornish, Cala rag ger da, a straw for a good word.

Mr. Lysons, quoting from “The Scrope and Grosvenor Roll,” another
controversy on the same armorial coat, (and which has been recently
published by Sir Harris Nicolas) notices that testimony was adduced on
behalf of the Carminows, tracing the use of their arms back to the
reign of our renowned King Arthur! To such evidence on armorial
bearings, as Lysons justly remarks, little credit is due.

The church is large, and contains some ancient monuments, believed to
be of the Carminow family, with shields and other decorations.

The advowson of the living belongs to the Trevelyans, of Nettlecombe,
in Somersetshire, and one of that family is the incumbent.

The patron saint is St. Martin of Tours; and the parish feast is kept
on the nearest Sunday to November the 11th, St. Martin’s day in the
Roman Calendar.

  This parish measures 2023 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2306    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           193   11    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    363   |    391   |     504    |    508
    giving an increase of 40 per cent. in 30 years.
  The present rector is the Rev. Horatio Mann, instituted in 1816, on
    the presentation of Sir M. Blakiston, Bart.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The south-western corner of this parish, near the Dry Tree, is
situated on the serpentine of Goonhilly Downs. The remainder of the
parish belongs to the calcareous series, and corresponds with Manaccan
and the other parishes immediately bordering on the southern banks of
the Helford river.




MAWGAN IN PYDER.


HALS.

St. Mawgan Rectory in Pider, hath upon the north the Irish Sea, east
St. Evall, west Lower St. Coumb, south St. Columb Major and Colan.

In the Domesday Book, 20 William I. 1087, this district was taxed
under the name of Lan-cherit; here was an endowed rectory, chapel or
church before that time; and the same endowed by the Prior of the
Priory of Plympton (founded by the West Saxon Kings). Afterwards, when
this old church was re-edified and enlarged to the mode and bulk it
now shows, it was then consecrated or dedicated to the honour of
Almighty God, in the name of St. Mawgan aforesaid; and this is
evidenced from the Inquisitions of the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester, 1294, into the value of Benefices, in decanatu de Pidre,
Sancti Maugani £6. 13_s._ 4_d._, and the Prior of Plympton received
£1. 6_s._ 8_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, Mawgan Rectory, without
the Saint, is rated £26. 13_s._ 4_d._ After the first Inquisition into
the value of the revenues of this church, it follows in that book,
Prior de Plymton percipit de Ecclesia Sancti Maugani 26_s._ 8_d._ per
annum. The patronage, since the dissolution of that Priory, 26 Henry
VIII. in Arundell of Lanherne; the incumbent Tregenna; and the parish
rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, £178. 9_s._

From this church is denominated the manor and barton house of
Lanherne, contiguous therewith; which of old was the lands of Symon
Pincerna, id est Butler; so called for that, as tradition saith, he
was butler of the cellar, or waited upon the cup, bottle, or glass of
King Henry II. and is mentioned from the Records of the Exchequer, in
Mr. Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page 45, to have held by the tenure of
knight service in Lanherne, one knight’s fee; which gentleman was also
lord of the manor of St. James’s in Middlesex, at Westminster, who
exchanged the same with King Henry II. or King Henry III. for the
manor of Conerton, in the parish of Gwythian and hundred of Penwith in
this county; which deeds of conveyance are yet to be seen at Lanherne.

The issue male of the Pincernas failing, the two daughters and heirs
of his family were married, temp. Edward III. to Arundell, of
Trembleth in St. Ervan, and Umphravill; hence it is we read in the
Rolls of the Exchequer and Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page 43,
Johannes de Umfranvill tenet in decanatu de Pidre, ratione Aliciæ
uxoris suæ, unam mag. feod. in Lanherne, 3d Henry IV.

After Arundell’s match with Pincerna’s heir, he removed to Lanherne,
which hath ever since been the seat of that famous and flourishing
family, who derive their name from John de Arundell, temp. Henry I.;
since which time (for about twenty-three descents) they have married
with the inheritrixes of Trembleth, Pincerna, Lamburne, Lescor,
Lanbaddern, Tresithny, Carmenow, Grey, Denham, and several others; so
that by reason of their wealth, or great estates, the country people
heretofore entitled them by the name of the Great Arundells, (see Mr.
Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page 144,) though there was a great
diminution of their ancient estate at and after the time that John
Arundell, temp. Queen Mary, married Anne, the daughter of Sir Henry
Gernigan, Knight, Master of the Horse, or Captain of the Guards to
that Queen. However, I take it his son or grandson, John Arundell,
Esq. married the coheir of Chydiock, and thereby repaired part of that
loss, and had by her issue John Arundell, Esq. afterwards knighted,
who married Elizabeth Roper, daughter of the Lord Teynham, and by her
had issue two sons that died without issue, and Elizabeth, married to
Sir Richard Billinge, knight; ―――― married to Sir Robert Bedingfield,
knight; and ―――― that was entered into a monastery of Benedictine nuns
in France, as I am informed.

Sir John Arundell, knight, (my very kind friend,) after his lady’s
decease, took for his second wife ―――― daughter of John Arundell, of
Trerice, esq. the relict of John Trevanion, of Caryhayes, esq. by whom
he had no issue. Whereupon the said Sir John Arundell, having by fine,
proclamation, and recovery, docked his estate tail to bar the
remainder, settled the same upon his grandson, Richard Billinge, Esq.
by his last will and testament; on condition that he and his posterity
for ever should assume the surname of Arundell, in conjunction with
that of Billinge, or separate, anno Dom. 1701.

The first gentleman of this family that appears on public record to
have served the state or the country, was Sir John Arundell, knight,
Sheriff of Cornwall, 6 Henry V. 1418, when Stephen Durneford was
Sheriff of Devon. Renfry Arundell, esq. his son, was Sheriff of
Cornwall 16 Henry VI. 1443, (when one Thomas Arundell was Sheriff of
Devon,) Renfry Arundell, esq. was Sheriff of Cornwall 3 and 4 Edward
IV. 1483.

John Arundell, son of the said Renfrye, had his first education in the
college of Canons Augustine in St. Columb, partly founded and endowed
by his ancestors; from whence he removed to Exeter College, in Oxford,
where, after he had taken his degrees of Bachelor and Master of Arts,
he was ordained Priest, and presented by his father to the great
rectory of St. Columb Major in Cornwall; and accordingly, had
institution and induction thereto from the Bishop of Exeter;
afterwards he was chosen Dean of Exeter, when Doctor Fox was Bishop
thereof, 1490; where after he had sat for some time, upon the
translation of William Smith, Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, to
Lincoln, (the successor of John Hals, who died 1492,) he had bestowed
upon him by King Henry VII. that bishoprick, and was consecrated anno
Dom. 1496; afterwards, upon the death of Dr. Redman, Bishop of Exeter,
1504, he was translated to that diocese, and was installed Bishop
thereof 1504; where, after he had well governed that diocese for about
two years space, he died at London, 19 February 1506, and lies buried
in St. Clement’s Church without Temple Bar.

From this family, by younger branches, were descended, temp. Richard
III. the knightly family of the Arundells late of Tolvorne (from
whence the writer of those lines by females is descended); as also the
Arundells, late of Trevithick, in St. Columb Major, temp. Edward VI.;
as also the Baron Arundells of Wardour in Wiltshire, temp. James I.;
as also the Arundells of Gloucestershire, temp. Charles I.

Though this family by the name of Arundell is set forth in Battle
Abbey corrupted roll, to have come out of France with the Conqueror, I
take it to be denominated from Arundell town and castle in Sussex,
(for as Sir John Arundell, the last possessor of Lanherne, told me he
could never understand there was any such local place in France as
Arundell, though he lived long in that country and made strict inquiry
after it,) for Ederick the Saxon was Earl of Arundell town and castle
aforesaid, before William the Conqueror landed here, who after the
death of King Harold was displaced and disinherited by the Conqueror,
and Roger de Montgomery made Earl thereof in his place, to whom his
estate was given. However, notwithstanding that this family, out of a
supposed allusion to their name, give for their arms, in a field Sable
six swallows, in pile three, two, and one, Argent or proper, for that
Arond in Gaulish French is a swallow; now corrupted after the Latin to
hirundelle; guenol, Tisbicock, guenvoll, British: as (χελιδων, hirundo
in Greek) in Armoric guinib is a swallow. Arond in French,
Ar-ran-dell, British, is the lake of water division valley.

One Bishop of this parish, in his youth, was, after his school
education at Retallock, in St. Columb Major, in the Latin and Greek
tongues, under Mr. John Coode, that famous schoolmaster, taken by the
cost and care of Sir John Arundell, of Lanherne, from thence, and
placed by him in Douay College in Flanders, where he took orders as a
Catholic Roman Priest, and afterwards returned into England, and
became house chaplain to the said Sir John Arundell, knight; and from
thence visited and confirmed the Roman Catholics in those parts for
many years, by the pretended surname of Mr. Gifford; he died at
Hammersmith, near London, 20 March 1733, aged 99 years, and ordered
his body to be opened and his heart to be taken out, and sent to Douay
aforesaid, and kept in spirits, and his body to be buried in Pancras
church, in London. (London Gazette, 23 March 1733.) He was made Doctor
of Divinity by his College aforesaid, and consecrated Bishop of
――――[5] in the Banqueting House at Whitehall, in the last year of King
James II.

Car-nan-ton in this parish, id est, the Rock Valley Town, was the voke
lands of a considerable manor, taxed in the Domesday Book 1087. As it
was then so it is now, a franchise royal, pertaining in chief to the
Crown, invested with the jurisdiction of a Court Leet within its
precincts, and had lately its steward and bailiff, to attend the
public services in trials at law between party and party, on pleas of
debt and damage; and here Robert Thomye held the fourth part of a
knight’s fee of land, temp. Henry IV. as Mr. Carew informs us.

It was lately the dwelling of William Noye, of Pendrea in Buryan, Esq.
farmer thereof; who was first bred a student at law in Lincoln’s Inn;
afterwards, having taken his degrees therein, he was chosen Member of
Parliament for the town of St. Ives in Cornwall, in which capacity he
stood for some Parliaments in the beginning of the reign of King
Charles I. and was specially famous for being one of the boldest and
stoutest champions of the subject’s liberty in Parliament that the
Western parts of England afforded; which being observed by the Court
party, King Charles was advised by his Cabinet Council that it would
be a prudent course to divert the force and power of Noye’s skill,
logic, and rhetoric another way, by giving him some Court preferment;
whereupon King Charles made him his Attorney-general, 1631; by which
expedient he was soon metamorphosed from the assertor of the subjects’
liberty and property to a most zealous and violent promoter, beyond
the laws, of the despotic and arbitrary prerogative or monarchy of his
Prince; so that, like the image of Janus at Rome, he looked forward
and backward, and by means thereof greatly enriched himself.

Amongst other things he is reflected upon by our chronologers for
being the principal contriver of the Ship-money tax, laid by King
Charles upon his subjects, for setting forth a navy or fleet of ships
at sea, without the consent of Lords or Commons in Parliament; which
moneys were raised by writ to the Sheriffs of all counties, and
Commissioners for a long time brought into the Exchequer twenty
thousand pounds per mensem, to the great distaste of the Parliament,
the Laity, and Clergy, who declared against it as an unlawful tax.
Nevertheless all the twelve judges after Noye’s death, except Hutton
and Crook, gave their opinions and hands to the contrary, in Hampden’s
case; viz. Branston, Finch, Davenport, Denham, Jones, Trevor, Vernon,
Berkeley, Crawley, and Weston. (See Baker’s Chronicle, printed 1656.)
However, out of kindness to the clergy, the King wrote to all the
Sheriffs of England, requiring that the clergy, possessed of
parsonages or rectories, should not be assessed above a tenth part of
the land rate of their several parishes, and that regard should be had
to vicars accordingly; by which rule the quanto or sum of this
Ship-money Tax by the month may be calculated. But I shall conclude
this paragraph of Noye in the words of Hammon Le Strange, Esq. in the
Life of King Charles I. viz. “Noye became so servilely addicted to the
King’s prerogative, by ferreting up old penal statutes, and devising
new exactions, for the small time he enjoyed his power, that he was
the most pestilent vexation to the subject that this latter age
afforded,” &c. He died on Saturday, August the 9th 1634, and was
buried in the church of New Brentford, Middlesex, with an inscription
on a stone to this purpose: “Here lyes the body of William Noye, Esq.
som tyme Atturney Generall to Kinge Charles I.” This gentleman writ
that excellent book of the law called Noye’s Reports; he married ――――
and had issue: Edward Noye, his eldest son, killed in a duel soon
after his father’s death; and Humphrey Noye, his second son. He
married Hester, daughter of the Lord Sands of Hampshire, and by her
had issue two sons, William Noye and Humphrey Noye, that died without
issue, and Katherine, married to William Davies, gentleman, of St.
Earth; and Bridgman, to John Williams of Rosworthy, Esq. sometime
Commissioner for the Peace, temp. Queen Anne, in whose right he is now
in possession of this barton of Carnanton, but by her he had no issue;
after her decease he married Dorothy, daughter of Peter Day,
gentleman, and by her hath issue, and giveth for his arms, in a field
Argent a fess checky Gules and Vert, between three griffin’s heads
erased Vert, each gorged with a ducal crown Or; the paternal coat
armour of the Williams’s, of Dorset or Wiltshire; his grandfather
coming from thence a steward to the Arundells of Lanherne.

The arms of Noye are: Argent, three bendlets and a canton Sable, on
the canton a cross of the Field; and another, Azure, three crosses
botony in bend Argent.

The Attorney-general on a day, having King Charles I. and the
principal officers and nobility of his Court, at a dinner at his house
in London, at which time the Arch Poet Ben Jonson, and others, being
at an inn on the other side the street, and wanting both meat and
money for their subsistence, at that exigent resolved to try an
expedient to get his dinner from the Attorney-general’s table; in
order to which, by his landlord at the inn aforesaid, he sent a white
timber plate or trencher to him, when the King was sat down to table,
whereon was inscribed these words:

    When the world was drowned
    No deer was found,
  Because there was noe Park;
    And here I sitt
    Without ere a bitt,
  Cause Noyah hath all in his Arke.

Which plate being presented by the Attorney-general to the King,
produced this effect, that Jonson had a good dish of venison sent him
back by the bearer, to his great content and satisfaction; on which
aforesaid plate, by the King’s direction, Jonson’s rhymes were thus
inverted or contradicted:

    When the world was drowned
    There deer was found,
  Although there was noe park;
    I send thee a bitt
    To quicken thy witt,
  Which comes from Noya’s Arke.

William Noye, anagram, I moyle in Law. He was the blow-coal,
incendiary, or stirrer up of the Civil Wars between King Charles and
his Parliament, by asserting and setting up the King’s prerogative to
the highest pitch, as King James I. had done before, beyond the laws
of the land as aforesaid; and as Counsell for the King he prosecuted
for King Charles I. the imprisoned Members of the House of Commons,
1628: viz. Sir John Elyot, Mr. Coryton, and others; whom after much
cost and trouble he got to be fined two thousand pounds each, the
others five hundred pounds, and further to be sentenced,
notwithstanding they paid those fines, not to be delivered from prison
without submission and acknowledgment of their offences, and security
to be put in for their good behaviour for the future.

Den-sill, alias Dyn-sill, in this parish, synonymous words, signifying
man-chapel or church, or a man of the church or chapel; otherwise
Den-sell is either man-great or great-man; and upon the confines of
those lands, on the high and lofty downs, is situate Densill Barrow,
that is to say Densill grave or burying place; a notable tumulus,
wherein some person of this little barton, after the ancient British
manner, was, before or soon after Christianity prevailed, here
interred. The rubbish and down-fallen walls of a free chapel,
heretofore on this place, prove the truth of this etymology, known now
by the name of Chapel Garder; garda, gerder, is a churchyard or field.

From this place was denominated an ancient family of gentlemen,
surnamed de Densill, or Densell; and the first of those gentlemen that
have come to my knowledge was Thomas Densill, that married Skewish,
temp. Henry VI. who had issue by her John, that married the daughter
and heir of Trenowith, of St. Colomb Major, temp. Edward IV.; on whose
right he annexed the lands of Trenowith to his manor of Densell, as it
remains to this day; (those Trenowiths lye interred in the north side
of St. Colomb Church, now pertaining to Mr. Vivian;) by Trenowth’s
heir the said John had issue, John Densill, esq. barrister at law, who
had his education at Lincoln’s Inn, afterwards was made Serjeant at
law, 1531, married Mary, daughter of Sir ―――― Lucas, of Warwickshire,
by whom he had issue two daughters, that became his heirs; Anne,
married to William Hollis, of Houghton, in Nottinghamshire, knight,
ancestor of the Earls of Clare, and now Duke of Newcastle; Alice to
Mr. Reskymer, father of Sir John Reskymer, of Reskymer, knight,
Sheriff of Cornwall 27 Henry VIII. This John Densill, Serjeant at law,
died 3 January 1535, and was buried in the church of St. Giles in the
Fields.

The name, estate, and blood of those Densills, being thus terminated
in Hollis and Reskymer, the Hollis’s have long time made it a font
name in their family, to preserve the memory thereof; in particular,
there was lately extant Densill Hollis, created Baron Hollis, of
Ifield, 2 April 1661, Privy Councillor to King Charles II. Lord High
Steward of the honours, manors, and revenues to his Queen Catharine;
Extraordinary Ambassador in France 1663, 1664, 1665, 1666; afterwards
Ambassador and Plenipotentiary at Breda, 1667; uncle unto John and
Gilbert late Earls of Clare.

This little barton and manor of Densill was by the Earl of Clare sold
to Buller, temp. Charles II.; from Buller to Vivian, of Truan; and by
Vivian to Pendarves, temp. William III. 1700; and from Pendarves to
Upton, now in possession thereof, as I am informed.

From the family of Densill, by a younger branch, was descended the
Densills of Philley, in Devon; in particular Richard Densill, younger
brother to the Serjeant’s father, whose only daughter and heir was
married to Martin Fortescue, Esq. who first brought Buckland Filleigh
to that family, as I am informed; after his decease she was married to
Sir Richard Pomeroye, of Bury Pomeroye, in Devon, Knight of the Bath
at the creation of Henry Prince of Wales, afterwards Henry VIII.

Quere whether John de Mawgan Sheriff of Cornwall 12 and 19th of
Richard II. were not of this parish or St. Mawgan in Kerryer; as also
the Mawgans of Essex, who gave for their arms, Argent, two bars, in
chief three mullets Sable.


TONKIN.

The patron of this parish is St. Mawgan, one of the missionaries from
Ireland.

It is a rectory, in the patronage of Sir John Arundell, of the
Lanhearne, which was the ancient name of the parish; which, says the
author of the English Etymological Dictionary, is not unlikely from
Lan, a church, and Herwa, to fly, meaning a place of refuge.

I shall begin with the most important place,


THE MANOR OF LANHEARNE.

This place had formerly possessors of the same name, but how long they
lived in it is uncertain; for I can meet with but one and the last of
them; John de Lanhearne, who by Margaret, the daughter and heir of
Richard Fitz John, had only one daughter and heir, Alice, married the
15th Henry III. (A. D. 1231) to Sir R. Arundell, of Trembleth, Knight,
ever since which time Lanhearne hath been the principal seat of this
illustrious family. I shall not here enter into a detail of the many
great men it hath produced, referring myself to their well known
pedigrees; and shall only take notice here that the Lord Arundell of
Wardour, Arundell of Tolvorne, Trevethick, &c. were descended from
younger branches thereof; and insert what Mr. Camden and Mr. Carew say
of them. The first hath these words:

“Near which place (St. Colomb), at a little distance from the sea,
stands Lanhearon, the seat of the family of the Arundells, knights,
who upon account of their vast riches, were not long since called ‘The
Great Arundells.’ They are sometimes called in Latin De Hirundine; and
appositely enough in my mind, for a swallow in French is Hirondelle,
and their arms are, in a field Sable, six swallows Argent. ’Tis
certainly an ancient and noble family, as also very numerous: to the
arms whereof Brito, a poet, alludes, where he describes a warlike man
of this family attacking a Frenchman, about the year 1170.

  Swift as the swallows whence his arms device
  And his own name are took, enraged he flies
  Through gazing troops, the wonder of the field,
  And sticks his lance in William’s glittering shield.”

Mr. Carew says of this family:

“Their name is derived from Hirundelle, in French a swallow, and out
of France at the Conquest they came, and six swallows they give in
arms. The country people entitle them ‘The Great Arundells,’ and
greatest for love, living, and respect, in the country heretofore they
were.” (See Carew, p. 343, Lord De Dunstanville’s edition.)


THE EDITOR.

The name of Arundell has not, in all probability, any thing to do with
swallows. It is on the contrary derived from their Castle in the Arun
Dale, Sussex, which like all other British or Saxon names having the
slightest resemblance in sound to a French word, has been referred to
a Norman origin.

Mr. Lysons says that Sir John Arundell, the last of the Lanhearne
branch, or parent stock, who died in 1701, settled his estates on his
grandson, Richard Billinge, Esq. with the condition of his taking the
name of Arundell. This gentleman had an only daughter and heiress, who
carried the property by her marriage to the Lords Arundell of Wardour.

It does not appear that any of the Wardour Arundells have ever resided
at Lanhearne; with a sectarian attachment to the ancient faith, they
kept up a Catholic establishment at this place, and retained great
numbers of the parishioners in communion with the See of Rome, by
making it a passport to lucrative employment and to good cheer; but
the house having been appropriated to the reception of Nuns from
Antwerp, of the order of Carmelites, as reformed by St. Tereza, and
the secular establishment broken up, the system of private
interpretation has entirely superseded the authority of Popes and
Councils, so that not a Catholic can now be found without the walls.
The Nuns were received here on their flying from the French Invasion
to their native country, for all were English, and their numbers are
still maintained by fresh recruits.

Henry Arundell, the 8th Baron Arundell, of Wardour, having built a
magnificent house adjacent to the old castle, and feeling little
interest about the property in Cornwall, although it is said to have
regularly descended through the Dinhams, from a period anterior to the
Norman Conquest, sold the whole in parcels, with the exception of
Lanhearne, and has thereby several the very ancient connexion of his
family with this county.

The church stands near the river, and adjacent to the house of
Lanhearne. It is decorated on the inside with a rood loft, very few of
which have been suffered to remain, and by monuments to the Arundells,
with inscriptions, most of which may be found in Mr. C. S. Gilbert’s
History of Cornwall.

There is also another to Humphrey Noye, which, as his descendant and
heir, the Editor hopes he may be excused for transcribing:

  Here lyeth the Body of
  Collonell Humphry Noye,
  Son and Heir of William
  Noye, of Carnanton, Esq^e,
  Attorney Generall to Charles
  The First, of Blessed Memory,
  King of Great Britaine, France,
  And Ireland. Who was intered
      the 12^{th} of December,
      Annoq^e Dom: 1679.

On the stone are the arms:

Arg. three bends and a canton Sab. on the canton an English cross of
the Field.

The crest of Noye is a dove bearing an olive branch, and the motto:
Teg yw Hedwch, Lovely in Peace. Evidently an allusion to the names
Noye and Noah.

The above words were on a slate stone laid flat on the pavement, so
that the letters were beginning to disappear; but Mr. Humphry
Willyams, his successor in Carnarton, although not his descendant, has
recently preserved the stone and the inscription, by placing this
memorial perpendicularly against one of the walls.

The manor of Carnarton belonged to the father, if not to the
grandfather, of the Attorney-general. He was born however at Pendrea,
in St. Burian, where the family had been settled time out of mind, but
understood to be of Norman extraction.

Little is known of Mr. Noye’s early life, till he became a member of
Exeter College, in the year 1593. He removed from thence to Lincoln’s
Inn, and was chosen Member for Helston to the Parliament which met in
January 1620. He afterwards represented St. Ives, and certainly took
an active, zealous, and able part in fostering the nascent liberties
of his country; but having formed a connexion with Mr. Wentworth, he
became a partizan in what was afterwards named the Stafford Faction,
was made Attorney-general in 1631, devised the exaction of Ship Money,
and conducted himself in a manner very different from the promise of
his former days; fortunately for himself, Mr. Noye died in 1634,
before the more violent agitations commenced, which terminated in the
Civil War. He left three children, Edward his eldest son and heir,
Humphrey, and Catharine.

Edward lost his life not long after the Attorney-general’s decease, in
a duel with a Captain Byron. Humphrey then inherited the property.

Catharine married John Cartwright, esq. of Aynhoe, in Northamptonshire,
whose descendant in the fifth degree, William Ralph Cartwright, is now
of that place (1835), and Member for the county.

Mr. Noye’s will is so curious as to be worthy of insertion:

     Incerta mortis hora, hodie ventura, suspecta esse debeat
     Christiano: sensi me gravatum: mens tamen, Deo annuente,
     sanitate viget (quam nollem in extremis de mundariis
     cogitare) hinc est quod――

     Ego Will’mus Noye die mensis Junii tertio, anno Domini
     millesimo sexcentesimo trigesimo quarto, rerum mearum
     dispositionem, per præsens testamentum meum (Dei nomine
     primitus invocato) ut inferius scriptum est ordinare statui.

     Lego animam meam Deo omnipotenti, ejusdem et universi
     Conditori. In illum credo qui dixit, Ego sum resurrectio et
     vita; et quia credidi in illum vivam etiam si mortuus
     fuerim. Corpus meum terræ, unde confectum est, diem
     novissimum expectaturum, lego. Novi quod Redemptor meus
     vivit, et in die illa de terra resurrecturus in carne mea
     videbo salutare illum, quem oculi mei conspecturi sunt.
     Reposita est hæc spes in sinu meo. Funeralia celebrari nolo.

     Pauperibus de Isleworth 100_s._; de St. Burian cum capellis
     100_s._; de St. Mawgan in Pyder 150_s._; Will^o Browne
     200_s._ et tantum uxori suæ; Roberto Wescombe 100 marcas;
     Egidio Chubb 300_s._; Will’mo Richards 200_s._ Humfredo
     filio meo mille marcas do, lego. Et eidem Humfredo lego
     annualem centum marcarum exeuntem de omnibus tenementis meis
     in hundredo de Pyder in comitatu Cornubiæ, habendum eidem
     Humfredo et hæredibus suis, durante vita Johannis fratris
     mei, et uxoris suæ et superviventis eorum, ad festa Omnium
     Sanctorum et Philippi et Jacobi, per æquales portiones
     annuatim solvendum; liceatque eis in omnibus præmissis
     distringere quoties prædictus redditus fuerit insolutus. Et
     eidem Humfredo et hæredibus suis do et lego omnia tenementa
     mea in Warpstowe in comitatu Cornubiæ prædicto.

     Reliqua meorum Edwardo filio meo, quem executorem testamenti
     mei constitui, dissipanda (nec melius speravi) reliqui. In
     cujus rei testimonium istud testamentum meum manu mea
     propria scripsi, ac illud sigilli mei appositione, et
     nominis subscriptione confirmavi.

                                       WM. NOYE. (L. S.)

     Probatum fuit testament. suprascriptum apud London. coram
     judice 5^o Septembris 1634.

Several of Mr. Noye’s works have been printed, and others remain in
manuscript.

     Noye’s Grounds and Maxims of the English Law, various
     editions; the last, with additions by Charles Barton, Esq.
     in 1800.

     Noye’s Reports, printed in 1656, 2d edition in fol. 1669.

     Noye’s Perfect Conveyancer, London 1655.

     Noye’s Complete Lawyer, London 1661, and a second edition in
     8vo, 1674.

     Noye’s Treatise of the Rights of the Crown, declaring how
     the King of England may support and increase his Annual
     Revenues, in 12mo, 1715, but written in the 10th year of
     Charles the First. The Editor has two MSS. of this work.

The following MSS. are preserved in the British Museum.

     Some Notes from Mr. Attorney-general Noye’s Reading in
     Lincoln’s Inn, Aug. 1632, where he showed that Law Readings
     are of great antiquity.――Harl. MSS. No. 980, art. 164.

     From the same Readings. That every Inn of Court is an
     University, extolling the Ancient Lawyers for not assuming
     Lofty Titles, &c.――Ibid. art. 165.

     From the same, relative to Officers in the Forest.――Ibid.
     art. 166.

     His Opinion that Espousals in Facie Ecclesiæ are but pro
     honestate publicanda.――Ibid. art. 174.

     Ex Ultima Voluntate sive Testamento Willelmi Noye, Attornati
     Generalis.――Harl. MSS. 980, art. 226.

     Mr. Noye’s Argument on the Earl of Suffolk’s case, 16th
     April 1628――Harl. MSS. 2305, art. 51.

     The Will of Mr. Wm. Noye, (Lat.) June 3d, 1634.――Cotton MSS.
     Titus B. VIII. 344.

     Memoirs of William Noye.――Sir Hans Sloane’s MSS. see
     Ayscough’s Catalogue, vol. II. p. 736.

Mr. Noye also left in manuscript several collections from the Records
in the Tower, especially two large volumes:――

     One respecting the King’s prerogative for maintaining the
     Naval Power according to the practice of his Ancestors.

     The other relating to the Privileges and Jurisdiction of
     Ecclesiastical Courts, to which Doctor Thomas James, the
     learned Compiler of the Bodleian Catalogue, acknowledges his
     obligation in a work, entitled “A Manuduction or
     Introduction into Divinity,” Oxford, 1625, 4to.

Mr. Noye had the honour of receiving the public thanks of his College,
under the following circumstances: Sir William Petre, son of John
Petre, of Torbryan in Devonshire, well known as Secretary of State in
the time of King Henry the Eighth, and successively in the reigns of
his three successors, had been a Commoner of Exeter College, and from
thence elected a Fellow of All Souls. He afterwards became Principal
of Peckwater Hall, one of the Visitors of Religious Houses, and
finally Secretary of State. Sir John Petre, by participating in the
good fortune of all those who were favourites at Court in this
eventful period of our history, appropriated to himself a share of the
Confiscated Church Lands, most profusely distributed; and by so doing
became the founder of a family still existing, with an hereditary seat
in Parliament, and professing the Catholic religion. Wishing perhaps
to make some restitution, Sir John Petre founded eight Fellowships at
Exeter College, in the Protestant University of Oxford, to all of
which, called Petrean Fellowships, he continued to nominate during his
life, according to an ancient custom in similar cases; but when his
successors attempted to exercise the same right or privilege, they
were resisted by the College, and the cause came to be tried in the
Court of Common Pleas, under the form of a replevin; they were
successfully and gratuitously supported by Mr. Noye, as will appear
from the passage in the College Register.

A. D. 1614. Circa idem tempus reclivimus vaccas Edmundi Lord per
replevin de Walton Court, ubi hæsit paulisper negotium donec Baro
Petreius illud transferri curavit ad Communia Placita, ut ibidem
decernatur.

Petimus autem nos per Dominum Chamberlyne, servientem ad Legem, ut,
bonâ cum judicum veniâ, in Comitiis Oxoniensibus coram Justitiario
Regis hoc transigeretur, sed obnixe obstitit Baro Petreius. Sic
convenerunt Rector et Magister Chambers, ex Collegii consensu, ad
causam promovendam in Communibus Placitis. Qui adeuntes Dominum
Gulielmum Noye, olim hujus Collegii Baccellarium, virum in jure
municipali (si quis alius per totam Angliam) perspicacissimum et
profundissimum, ab eo semper acceperunt quod esset faciendum.

Perlegit ille, et diligentissime perpendit omnes evidentias nostras et
statuta, expendit rationes utriusque partis, conteruit solide
compendia sive brevia quibus servientes (nam tales solum audiuntur in
Communibus Placitis) informabantur. Ipse (sc. Dominus Gulielmus Noye)
eos, relictis propriis negotiis, una cum nobis edit et instauravit;
quæ omnia sponte fecit et alacriter, sine omni expectatione præmii,
quæ ideo in fastos referenda duximus, ut agnosceret talis viri in
Collegium pietatem grata posteritas.

The Editor possesses a picture of Mr. Noye painted on oak, by
Cornelius Jansen; and at the desire of Exeter College, he has recently
presented to them a copy, which is placed in the Hall.

Mr. Noye was succeeded by his eldest son Edward; but the melancholy
forebodings expressed in his will: “I have left all the remainder of
my property to my son Edward (whom I have constituted executor of this
my will) to be squandered, nor have I ever hoped any better,” were
rendered vain by the death of this young man, soon after that of his
father, in a duel with a Captain Byron.

Humphrey then succeeded as eldest son, and in the year 1637 allied
himself by marriage with the very distinguished family of Sandys, of
The Vine, near Basingstoke, in Hampshire.

The Editor has their marriage contract, which may be esteemed a
curiosity, as compared with the more lengthened writings of recent
times.

     “Articles of agreement, indented, had, made, and agreed upon
     the three and twentieth day of May, in the thirteenth year
     of the reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the grace of
     God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King,
     Defender of the Faith, &c. Between Henry Sandys, of the
     Vine, in the county of Southampton, Esq. and Hester Sandys,
     one of the daughters of the said Henry Sandys, of the one
     part, and Humphrey Noye, of Carnanton, in the county of
     Cornwall, Esq. of the other part, as followeth, viz.:

     “Whereas a marriage is intended to be had and solemnized
     between the said Humphrey Noye, of the one part, and the
     said Hester Sandys, of the other part, if the laws of God
     and the Holy Church shall permit the same,

     “In consideration of which marriage it is covenanted and
     agreed, by and between the said parties, as followeth:

     “Imprimis, the said Henry Sandys, for himself, his heirs,
     executors, and administrators, and for every and either of
     them, doth contract, promise, and grant, to the said
     Humphrey Noye, his executors, administrators, and assigns,
     and to and with every and either of them, by these presents,
     that in consideration of the said marriage, he the said
     Henry Sandys do and shall give and pay unto the said
     Humphrey Noye, his executors, administrators, or assigns,
     the full sum of two thousand pounds current money of
     England, as a marriage portion for and with the said Hester
     Sandys his daughter, to be paid unto the said Humphrey Noye,
     his executors, administrators, and assigns, in manner and
     form following, viz.: the sum of one thousand pounds current
     money, parcel of the said two thousand pounds portion, to be
     paid in hand at the very day of the marriage aforesaid, and
     the sum of one thousand pounds residue, parcel of the said
     two thousand pounds portion, to be paid in manner and form
     following, that is to say, five hundred pounds in and upon
     the first day of November next ensuing the date hereof, and
     the other five hundred pounds residue thereof, in and upon
     the feast day of the Ascension of our Blessed Lord and
     Saviour, then also next ensuing.

     “Item. The said Humphrey Noye, for himself, his heirs,
     executors, and administrators, and for every and either of
     them, doth covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the
     said Henry Sandys, his executors, administrators, and
     assigns, and to and with every and either of them, by these
     presents, that he the said Humphrey Noye, in consideration
     of the said marriage, at or before the feast of All Saints
     next ensuing, shall and will in due form of law convey,
     settle, and assure, to and for the use of the said Hester,
     his intended wife, so much of his lands and tenements as
     shall be of the clear yearly value of three hundred pounds,
     by the year, for and during the term of the natural life of
     her, the said Hester, for and in lieu of her jointure, freed
     and discharged of and from all and all manner of
     incumbrances whatsoever, the security thereof to be made in
     such manner and form as by Counsel learned in the law, of
     the said Henry Sandys and Humphrey Noye, shall be reasonably
     devised, advised, or required.

     “In witness whereof the parties abovesaid, to these present
     indentures, interchangeably have set their hands and seals
     the day and year first above written.”

The seals appended under the signatures Henry Sandys and Hester
Sandys, bear the impressions: Argent, a cross raguly Sable; arms of
their maternal ancestors, Sandys, of The Vine.

This lady’s grandfather, Sir Edwin Sandys, nephew of Edwin Sandys,
Archbishop of York, whose family originated from St. Bees, in
Cumberland, bearing for their arms, Or, a fess dancette between three
crosses crosslet fitchy Gules; married Elizabeth, daughter and sole
heiress of William Baron Sandys, of The Vine, by tenure in fee, under
a writ of summons issued by King Henry VIII. on the 3d of November
1529, in the 21st year of his reign. Their son Henry Sandys, party to
the above marriage settlement, married his first cousin Margaret,
daughter of Sir William Sandys, of Hedbury, in the County of
Worcester, and lost his life in one of the battles of the Civil War,
in 1644. They had several children, of whom William, Henry, and Edwin,
were in succession summoned to Parliament on the right deduced from
their grandmother, and with the last of these the barony fell again
into abeyance. Hester, their eldest sister, married Colonel Humphrey
Noye, and their daughter, Catharine, on the 21st of July 1679, married
William Davies, of St. Erth. John Davies, their son and ultimate heir,
married Elizabeth Phillips, of Tredrea; and their daughter and heiress
married the Rev. Edward Giddy, whose only son is the Editor of this
work.

Another daughter of Colonel Humphrey Noye and Hester Sandys,
christened Bridgman, in remembrance of Sir Orlando Bridgman, an early
friend and patron of the Attorney-general, married Mr. John Willyams
of Roseworthy, in Gwiniar, and, dying without issue, left him
Carnanton, which had fallen to her share. Mr. Willyams married
secondly Dorothy, daughter of Mr. John Day, by whom he had two sons.

John, the elder, married the daughter and heiress of Mr. Oliver, a
gentleman of Falmouth. They had a son, Mr. John Oliver Willyams, for
many years Colonel of the Cornwall Militia; and a daughter Ann,
married to Mr. William Lemon, jun. only son of the great Mr. Lemon.
The younger son was James; whose son James Willyams succeeded to
Carnanton, under the will of his first cousin John Oliver Willyams, in
the year 1809; and his son, Humphrey Willyams, Esq. now resides there,
having so much altered and improved the house and gardens, as to place
Carnanton among the gentlemen’s residences of the first class in
Cornwall.

Thomas Willyams, a Captain in the Navy (brother of Mr. John Willyams,
who married Miss Bridgman Noye,) married ―――― Fox, of Deal; they left
a son John Willyams, also a Captain in the Navy, who married Anne
Goodyere, and their son, the Reverend Cooper Willyams, Rector of
Kingston, near Canterbury, is known to the world by various
publications:

     A History of Sudeley Castle.

     A Campaign in the West Indies, with the reduction of the
     Island of Martinique, &c.

     A Voyage up the Mediterranean, with description of the
     Battle of the Nile; and some others.

He married Elizabeth Snell, of Whitby.

Mr. Cooper Willyams died July the 17th, 1816, leaving two sons and two
daughters.

The late Mr. John Oliver Willyams related to me an anecdote,
illustrative of the contingencies which are incident to human life,
and of the concatenation between public and private events.

His grandfather, Mr. John Willyams, had undertaken a journey to Oxford
in the year 1685, but was stopped at Exeter by the Duke of Monmouth’s
invasion; he returned in company with a gentleman of St. Columb, and
remained there a few days, where at some public exhibition he met with
Miss Bridgman Noye, who soon afterwards became his wife.

Mr. Hals devotes some pages to the virulent abuse of Colonel Humphrey
Noye, against whom it is obvious that he must have entertained a
personal animosity; but the Editor, having omitted various similar
effusions, hopes that he shall not be accused of any partial favour
towards his own ancestors, by omitting this also, which does not carry
with it the semblance of truth.

  Mawgan in Pider measures 6078 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           4016    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           360    6    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    543   |    622   |   580[6]   |    745
    giving an increase of 37 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Philip Carlyon, instituted on his own
    presentation in 1806. Net income in 1831, 585_l._


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish is situated entirely within the calcareous series, and its
rocks are the same as those of the adjoining parishes, St. Colomb
Major and St. Evall.

The parish feast is celebrated on the nearest Sunday to St. James’s
Day, July the 25th.


     [5] Probably a Bishop in Partibus Infidelium.

     [6] Perhaps 680.




ST. MELLION, OR ST. MELLYN.


HALS.

St. Mellyn Rectory is situate in the hundred of East, and hath upon
the north Kellaton, east St. Dominick, south Pillaton, west Quethiock.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294,
into the value of Cornish benefices, Ecclesia Sanctæ Meliani in
decanatu de East £4. In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, £11. 12_s._ 6_d._
The patronage in Coryton; the incumbent ――――; and the parish rated to
the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, for one year, £96. 13_s._

Niew-tone, now Newton, synonymous words, signifying after the English
Saxon a new town, was another district or voke lands of a manor taxed
in the Domesday Book, 1087; which lordship for many ages hath been the
seat of that ancient British family surnamed de Coryton.

William Coryton, Esq. Member of Parliament for Killaton, was one of
those imprisoned Members of Parliament, temp. Charles I. 1628, who
asserted the prerogative of Parliament, the liberty and property of
the subject, against the despotic and arbitrary power of the Monarch,
set up by Noye, his Attorney-general; for which he was fined five
hundred pounds, and could not be delivered from prison till he had
paid that sum, but forced to make a submission and acknowledgment of
his offence, and put in security for his good behaviour.

He was the father of Sir John Coryton, of this place, who, the 27th
February 13 Charles II. 1661, was by his letters patent of that date,
created the 605th Baronet of England. He married Mills of Exeter, and
had issue by her Sir John Coryton, Bart. his eldest son; who married
one of the heirs of Mr. Richard Chiverton, Knight, bred a Skinner in
London, and was Lord Mayor of that city 9 Charles II. 1657, by whom he
had issue two daughters. He was Sheriff of Cornwall, 1682.

After his decease his younger brother, William Coryton, Esq.
Barrister-at-law, succeeded to his honour and estate; who married the
daughter of Sir Theophilus Biddulph, of Westcomb, in Kent, the 744th
Baronet of England, by letters patent, bearing date 2 November 16
Charles II.; by whom he had issue Sir John Coryton, Bart. now extant.

After Sir William’s first wife’s death, he married the widow and
relict of Thomas Williams, Gent. a goldsmith or banker of Lombard
Street, in London; by whom, though a very aged woman, to recompence
that defect he had much riches or wealth. After his death she married
Sir Nicholas Trevanion, of St. Germans, who followed in marriage the
Delphic Oracle’s direction, and Dion’s,

  Refuse noe woman nere soe old,
  Whose marriage bringeth store of gold.

His sisters, Anne was married to John Peter, of Porthcuthan, Esq. and
Catherine to Clarke and Dobbins, and ―――― to Goodall, of Fowey, Esq.

The arms of Coryton are Argent, a cross saltier Sable.

Croca-don, or Croucadon, Cruco-don, words of one signification,
signifying bank, hillock or tumulus, hill or town; a place notable for
barrows, wherein human creatures were heretofore interred, before and
after the Roman Invasion. (See Tacitus in the life of Agricola.) This
place was the dwelling of Charles Trevisa, Gent. that married with
Fortescue; who giveth for his arms, Gules, a garb Or. Denominated, I
suppose from Trevisa, or Tre-wisa, in St. Enedor, and originally
descended from John Trevisa, born in Gloucestershire (as Baker saith),
who being for some time bred in Oxford, afterwards took orders, and
became a secular priest, that might marry; and then became domestic
chaplain to Thomas Lord Berkeley, by whom he was afterwards made Vicar
of Berkeley in Gloucestershire; where, at that Lord’s request, he
translated the Sacred Bible into the English tongue, though the same
was done by John Wickliff fifty years before, but not with that
perfection of language that Trevisa did it; although Trevisa’s
translation is altogether as far short of Tyndall’s in Henry the
Eighth’s days, by reason the English tongue was still improving to a
higher perfection; and yet Tyndall’s translation was far inferior to
that of King James I. notwithstanding they all agree in the original
substance, sense, and meaning of words in those translations; wherein
Wickliff, Trevisa, and Tyndall, made use of infinite Cornish-British
words to express the same. Neither is the last translation of King
James I. altogether void of them.

Mr. Trevisa also translated Bartholomew de Proprietatibus Rerum; the
Poly-chronicon of Ralph Higden; a treatise of all the Acts of King
Arthur; and divers other things. Lastly, this learned and painful
priest died about the year 1470, aged about eighty-six years.

Westcot, in this parish, was another district taxed in the Domesday
Book, 1087; it is now the dwelling, as I take it, of Mr. William
Brendon, Gent.

In this parish is Pentyley, or Pillaton, a house and church built and
so named by Mr. James Tillie, afterwards knighted, and married the
widow of Sir John Coryton.

Since the writing of the above premises, about the year 1712, Sir
James Tillie died, and as I am informed, by his last will and
testament, obliged his adopted heir, one Woolley his sister’s son, not
only to assume his name, (having no legitimate issue) but that he
should not inter his body after death in the earth, but fasten it in
the chair where he died with iron, his hat, wig, rings, gloves, and
best apparel on, shoes and stockings, and surround the same with an
oak chest, box, or coffin, in which his books and papers should be
laid, with pen and ink also; and build for reception thereof, in a
certain field of his lands, a walled vault or grot, to be arched with
moorstone; in which repository it should be laid without Christian
burial; for that as he said but an hour before he died, in two years
space he would be at Pentillie again; over this vault his heir
likewise was obliged to build a fine chamber, and set up therein the
picture of him, his lady, and adopted heir for ever; and at the end of
this vault and chamber to erect a spire or lofty monument of stone,
from thence for spectators to overlook the contiguous country,
Plymouth Sound and Harbour; all which as I am told is accordingly
performed by his heir, whose successors are obliged to repair the same
for ever out of his lands and rents, under penalty of losing both.

However I hear lately, notwithstanding this his promise of returning
in two years space to Pentiley, that Sir James’s body is eaten out
with worms, and his bones or skeleton fallen down to the ground from
the chair wherein it was seated, about four years after it was set up;
his wig, books, wearing apparel, also rotten in the box or chair where
it was first laid.


TONKIN.

I take this parish, as well as Mullion in Kerrier, to take its name
from its tutelar saint, Melania. The church is a rectory; the
patronage in Sir John Coryton.

The principal manor and seat in this parish is West Newton Ferrers, so
called from its relative situation to another Newton, and from its
ancient lords the Ferrers. As for the name Newton, it signifies no
other than the plain meaning of the word, a new town or house. In the
valuation made by Edward the First this manor is called Newton,
without any addition, as is the case at present in common speech.

William de Ferrers was Knight of this shire with Thomas Sereod,
Knight, 8 Edward II.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals has given a long history of St. Melania, the supposed patron
of this church, containing, however, little more than the usual
details of effects produced by the ascetic fanaticism popular in those
days. Personal sufferings and privations were then endured, under a
persuasion that bodily pain, mental stupidity, and a course of life
utterly useless to the human race, could alone ensure the divine
favour, in opposition to the sentiments,

  Hic manus ob patriam pugnando vulnera passi;
  Quique sacerdotes casti, dum vita manebat;
  Quique pii vates et Phœbo digna locuti;
  Inventas aut qui vitam excoluere per artes;
  Quique sui memores alios fecere merendo.

Newton came into the family of Coryton, by a marriage with the heiress
of Ferrers, and continued till that family became extinct in the male
line, on the decease of Sir John Coryton in 1739, who gave the
property to his widow Rachael, a daughter of Weston Helyar, Esq. of
East Coker in Somersetshire; and it has continued with her relations
nearly to the present time, under an entail, which carried Newton from
Mr. Weston Helyar, probably a great-grandson of the gentleman above
mentioned, to several other younger brothers; till the failure of
heirs male in all these brought it back to the son or grandson of the
elder brother, who, wishing to concentrate his property in
Somersetshire, has parted with the whole Cornish estate to Edward
Collins, Esq. of Truthan.

Although Sir John Coryton alienated his principal seat and manor by
this bequest to his widow, he devised a large share of the family
property to the descendants of his eldest sister Elizabeth, who
married William Goodall, of Fowey; and their grandson, on succeeding
to the estate, assumed the name of Coryton. The present representative
of this ancient family, John Tillie Coryton, Esq. has built a
magnificent house or castle at Pentilly in a most beautiful situation,
on the Tamar river, so that he need not regret the loss of Newton.

Sir John Coryton had two other sisters, one of whom, Johanna, married
John Peter, of Harlyn, Esq. The third sister married a gentleman of
the name of Vaughan.

In addition to the tales relative to Sir James Tillie’s funeral
direction, Mr. Hals has added several others, all to this gentleman’s
disadvantage, but not in any way illustrative of the times in which he
lived, or of the general manners prevalent in the country: they are
therefore omitted, with the exception of one respecting armorial
bearings.

It is certain that Mr. Tillie was one of those persons, most justly
esteemed, who advance themselves in the world without being beholden
in any considerable degree to their ancestors. Mr. Tillie was knighted
by King James II. and then not finding himself provided with a coat of
arms, he assumed, as Mr. Hals states, the blazon of Count Tillie, a
German Prince, which coming to the knowledge of King James, an
inquisition was ordered, the fact was established, and a fine imposed
on the knight, in addition to the demolition of the assumed arms, with
some acts of indignity.

It is moreover proper to add, that although Sir James Tillie did
without all question express some absurd fancies in respect to his
mortal remains, which were in part executed, yet they are far from
bearing the colour of impiety cast on them by Mr. Hals, and still less
are they chargeable with the blasphemies imputed to them by Mr.
Gilpin.

The church and tower are plain on the outside, but within are several
handsome monuments to the Corytons.

It seems much more probable that this church is dedicated to Mellitus,
the first Bishop of London, and third Archbishop of Canterbury, than
to an obscure African lady.

Bede has given various particulars of this eminent person, and his
life may be found in Capgrave’s Aurea Legenda. He led a second body of
missionaries in aid of the great St. Austin, and the conversion of a
Pagan temple into a Christian church, since expanded into St. Paul’s
Cathedral, and also the foundation of Westminster Abbey, are imputed
to him. He departed this life on the 24th of April, in the year 624.

  St. Mellion measures 2410 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1928    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           163    8    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    284   |    326   |     321    |    330
    giving an increase of 16 per cent. in 30 years.
  The Rev. George Fortescue died Rector of St. Mellion in 1835.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The Geology of this parish is precisely the same as that of St.
Dominick.




MENHENIOT.


HALS.

Men-hyn-yet, Men-hin-iet vicarage, is situate in the hundred of East,
and hath upon the north Linkinhorne, east Quethiock, south St.
Germans, west Leskeard. For the modern name of this parish, it is
taken from the manor of Men-hin-iet within the same; which is
compounded or conjugated of Cornish and Saxon, and signifies old or
ancient stone gate; for the terminative particle yet, jet, in Saxon
signifies a gate (as porth in British). This manor is one of the
franchises of Cornwall, privileged with the jurisdiction and freedom
of a court leet, for plea of debt or damage between party and party,
within the precincts thereof, by the Kings of England or Earls of
Cornwall; and hath its steward and bailiff to attend the public
services thereof, as the hundred of East hath.

At the time of the Norman Conquest this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Trehavock, now Trehawke, of which more under. In the
Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, into the value
of Cornish benefices, 1294, Ecclesia de Manyhynyet, (id est, English
Saxon, and Cornish, many ancient or old gate,) in decanatu de Est, is
rated £8. In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, £21. 15_s._ 4_d._ The
patronage in Exeter College, in Oxford; none but Fellows admittable to
the cure; the incumbent Snell; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per
pound Land Tax, 1696, temp. William III. £332. 6_s._ by the name of
Men-hyn-iet, as aforesaid.

Men is the common contraction of meyn, mein, main, a stone; and hyn,
him, the corruption of hen, heyn, hain, old, ancient. See Floyd upon
Lapis.

This manor of Men-hyn-yet, as I remember, was formerly the lands of
one Carmenow, a soldier or military man; by whose daughter and heir it
came first in marriage to Trelawny, in Edward the Fourth’s days.
Within the precincts of which lordship is situate the house and barton
of Poole, so called after the English from the natural circumstances
of the place; where, by reason of the level or evenness of the town
place, in winter season many lakes and pools of water stand. Of which
place thus speaks Mr. Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall: “Poole, for
its lowe and moyst seate, is not unaptly named, houseth Sir Jonathan
Trelawny, far beneath his worth and callinge. He marryed Sir Henry
Killigrew’s daughter, his father the coheir of Reskimer, his
grandfather Lamellyn’s inheritrix. His arms are Argent, a chevron
Sable, between three oak leaves Vert.”

There is a public fair held yearly in this church town, on June 11.

Ten-creek, Den-creek, in this parish, was formerly the lands and
possessions of Richard Earl of Cornwall, King of the Romans, second
son of King John; who probably at some time lived at it (as also at
his castle of Leskeard), for in the old dilapidated houses of this
once famous fabric, I saw the ruins of a moorstone oven, about
fourteen foot diameter, in testimony of the hospitality once kept
here. And moreover, in the front of the castlewise moorstone gate, or
portal, I beheld his arms cut in stone; viz. within a bordure
bezantée, a lion rampant crowned, whose arms in colours I think ought
to be thus blazoned: ill port ung lyon rampant de Gowles, en Argent,
bordure de Sable, talentée.

Here groweth a sort of tree, bearing a strange sort of leaves and
fruit, or berries, not seen in any other part of Cornwall, and
therefore without name given it by me or others.

Tre-havock, in this parish, Cornish Saxon, id est, the hawk town, was
taxed in the Domesday Book, 1087, as the voke lands of a parish or
manor which now is suitably called after the Cornish English
Tre-hauke; for that it seems heretofore it was a place notable for
keeping, mewing, or breeding hawks (or for that those lands were held
by the tenure of paying hawks to its lord); from which place was
denominated an old family of gentlemen surnamed de Tre-hauke, who gave
for their arms, in a field Sable, a chevron between three hawks. It is
now in the possession of Peter Keckwich, Esq. descended from the
Keckwiches of Catch-French, as they were from the Keckwiches of Essex;
who give for their arms, Argent, two lions in bend passant Sable,
cottised Gules.

Cur-tuth-oll, lands as I am informed heretofore pertaining to the nuns
or nunnery of Clares, at Leskeard, according to the name thereof;
after whose dissolution, 32 Henry VIII. it came to Becket, who gave
for his arms, in a field Sable, a fess between three boar’s heads
couped, and six cross-crosslets fitchee Or; in memory of the
Archbishop.

From Becket this place came by sale to Harris; from Harris to Hamlyn;
from Hamlyn to Cole, now in possession thereof, who was steward to
Francis Roberts, Esq. and got riches in the service of the Earl of
Radnor.

Tre-wint, in this parish, id est, the spring or well town, is the
dwelling of Thomas Kelly, Gent.

Dr. John Moorman, Vicar of this church, was the first minister in
Cornwall that said or taught the Lord’s Prayer, the Ten Commandments,
and the Creed in the English tongue. (See Feock and Creed.) He also
catechised the children therein; which I judge was in the latter end
of King Henry the Eighth’s, or the beginning of King Edward the
Sixth’s reign, 1549; for then by proclamation were called in all books
of the Latin service for churches; and the Bishops commanded in their
several dioceses that forthwith should be warned, all prebendaries of
their cathedral churches, all parsons, vicars, curates, and the
churchwardens of every parish within their dioceses, to bring in and
deliver up particularly.

In this parish was formerly extant a hospital for lepers, that had
competent lands and revenues.


TONKIN.

Pool, adjoining to the church town, was the seat of the Trelawnys, and
their chief dwelling for many generations, till they fixed at their
present one of Trelawen, in the parish of Pelynt. The chief manor in
this parish is called Menheniot, or Tregelly.


THE EDITOR.

The church of this large and opulent parish is of size proportioned to
it, having three large aisles. The tower is low and surmounted by a
spire. In the church are some monuments, but not of much antiquity.

Archbishop Courtenay appears to have settled the right of presentation
to this parish, by giving it to the Chapter of Exeter, with the
limitation of their always bestowing it on some one who is at the
time, or has been, a Fellow of Exeter College. The vicarage is endowed
with the great tithes, on a payment of £20 a year to Exeter College,
and it is therefore considered as a rectory. Mr. Carew observes (p.
277, Lord de Dunstanville’s edition) that this parish has been
successively graced with three well born and well educated incumbents,
Doctor Tremayne, Master Billett, and Master Dennis; and it is believed
that William of Wykeham held this preferment for some time previously
to Archbishop Courtenay’s endowment.

The late incumbent, the Reverend William Holwell, may be noticed for
his taste and skill in the fine arts. He was the son of a medical
practitioner at Exeter, and nephew of William Holwell, student and
tutor of Christ Church soon after the middle of the last century, and
then Vicar of Thornbury, in Gloucestershire, where he died in 1798,
having distinguished himself by the following, among other works:

The Beauties of Homer, selected from the Iliad, 8vo.

Extracts from Pope’s Translations of Homer compared with the Beauties
of the Original. 8vo.

A Mythological, Etymological, and Historical Dictionary. 8vo.

Mr. William Holwell, the nephew, was of course a Fellow of Exeter
College. He travelled through France and Italy about the year 1780,
where he began forming a collection of pictures, bequeathed on his
decease to the National Gallery. He is said to have taken Orders with
some reluctance, for the purpose of accepting this valuable living.
But the most important event in this gentleman’s life was his marrying
Charlotte, daughter and heiress of James Carr, Earl of Erroll. He in
consequence assumed the name of Carr. He died in the year 1830, having
survived his wife nearly twenty years, who has a monument to her
memory in Menheniot church.

In the valuation of Pope Nicholas, the name of this parish is written
Manyhinyhet, or Saihinet, proofs of the small reliance that can be
placed on mere phonic etymologies.

Cartuther, noticed by Mr. Hals, became the property and the residence
of the Morsheads, but having been sold, with all the other possessions
of that family, it was purchased by Mr. Kekewich.

Mr. Lysons gives a detail of other manors and bartons of little
interest.

This parish has the reputation of being the most fertile of corn,
especially of wheat, in the whole county. The aspect of the church
town gives a strong impression of monastic remains, but there is not
any tradition on record of a religious establishment in the place.

  Menheniot measures 6047 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          10599    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          1422   11    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    918   |   1024   |    1170    |   1253
    giving an increase of 36½ per cent. in thirty years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The southern part of this parish is bounded by the hill of Clicker
Tor, which is entirely composed of a dark compact serpentine,
abounding in steatite, asbestos, tremolite, and other magnesian
minerals. The occurrence of this large mass of serpentine, amidst an
extensive tract of rocks belonging to the calcareous series, imparts
no little geological interest to this parish, which deserves therefore
to be more minutely examined; for the cursory observations hitherto
published have not satisfactorily developed the connection of this
serpentine with the adjoining rocks. In crossing the parish from north
to south, the rocks are first seen to consist of compact felspar and
hornblend, resembling those at Rosecradock in St. Clear; next they
become more schistose, and the hornblend forms only the colouring
material, as it does on the north of Leskeard town; at Pengover the
hornblend again abounds, and is intermixed with calcareous spar, as in
the vicinity of St. Ives. Approaching the church of Menheniot, the
rocks again put on the appearance of a true hornblend schist, and this
is succeeded by the serpentine of Clicker Tor.


THE EDITOR.

Not only is the serpentine of the Lizard found at Clicker Tor, but the
plant also indicative of that formation, the great ornament of our
southern promontory, the ERRICA VAGANS, the multiflora of Hudson and
Ray, and the didyma of Withering. Nothing seems to be more
extraordinary, nor what, independently of experience, would be more
unexpected, than the existence of the same rare plants at distant and
unconnected places, where the peculiarities of soil and climate happen
to agree; but to increase the wonder still further, even this
diffusion has its limits. The southern hemisphere is said not to be
decorated by a single wild rose, the Ανασσα Ανθων of the northern
world. And the whole continent of America is believed not to produce a
single heath.

Our preconceptions of what would be fitting for intelligences superior
to our own, and _a fortiori_ as to what might be expected from
infinite wisdom and power, have been established beyond the shadow of
a doubt by SIR ISAAC NEWTON, in respect to the great bodies moving in
our universe. They perform all their revolutions in obedience to the
simple and general laws of gravity and inertia; and the rapidly
progressive discoveries of each succeeding year, establish the same
principle respecting causes acting conformably to general laws in the
internal construction, preservation, and renovation of our planet; and
we are moreover induced to believe that a like system must prevail in
the moral world, not from analogy alone, but from a deep conviction
that such a plan, and no other, can reconcile the existence of partial
evil with universal good: and thus conciliate the actual state of
things with the attributes of unlimited goodness, wisdom, and power;
but in respect to animal and vegetable life, although an arrangement
as plain and as demonstrative of infinite wisdom may exist, it is, in
the actual state of our knowledge, utterly hidden from our view.
Thousands of distinct species or genera have ceased to exist, and
their remains, varying from the most gigantic skeletons to objects
suited for a microscope, are daily brought under our view――animals and
plants have succeeded each other in the various geological periods,
tending in succession towards more elaborate construction and greater
general perfection; but not a trace is laid before us of the plan by
which this beautiful system is arranged; our ignorance compels us
therefore to suppose the immediate agency of THE DIVINITY itself, when
a plant indigenous to an old formation appears on one more recently
elevated to the surface; or when any of the innumerable changes take
place in an organized inhabitant of this or of some other plant.




ST. MERRAN, MERIN, OR MER-YN.


HALS.

Mer-in or Mer-yn, is situated in the hundred of Pedyr, and hath upon
the north the Irish sea, west St. Evall, south St. Ervyn, north-east
Padstow.

In the Domesday Book this district was taxed by the name of Trevoes or
Trevose, id est, the maid or virgin’s town; then and now the voke
lands of a manor annexed to Pawton, or Polton, (parcel of the lands of
the Prior of Bodman and Bishop of Exon before the Norman Conquest,) on
the confines of which, towards the sea, is yet extant the ruins of an
old church, chapel, and cemetery pertaining thereto, dedicated to St.
Constantine, the first Christian Emperor of Rome: which, upon the
encroachment of the sea-sand on the marsh beneath, which surrounded
and overwhelmed the same, was discontinued, and thereby gave occasion
to the inhabitants to build their now church of Merin in a more secure
place, further up in the country from the sea and sand, and moor or
marsh ground; the church of St. Constantine being in part converted
now to a dwelling house for poor people.

Near this church is yet extant St. Constantine’s Well, strong built of
stone and arched over; on the inner part hereof are places or seats
for people to sit and wash themselves in the streams thereof; the
consequence of which facts, if the inhabitants may be credited, is not
only very refreshing and salubrious, but, if it be dry weather,
immediately showers of rain will follow.

The barton of Trevose is now, by lease, in possession of Gregory
Peter, Esq. and Lawrence Growden, that well-known Quaker, the
reversionary fee pertaining to Sir Nicholas Morice, Baronet, as parcel
of his manor of Pawton; and is a large lofty promontory of land,
shooting out far into the Irish sea, beyond all other lands there, yet
notable for its production of sheep, barley, and rabbits, and not
altogether unprofitable for bullocks in winter season; and as fatal
and unfortunate for wrecking ships, that happen by night or stormy
weather to fall on the rocks thereof, at that or any other time.

Arel-yn, alias Har-lyn, in this parish. This barton is the dwelling of
my very kind friend and brother-in-law, Gregory Peter, Esq. Sheriff of
Cornwall part of the last year of William III. and first of Queen
Anne, 1701; he married Elizabeth, daughter of Gove of Devon, the
relict of William Wadland, merchant, by whom he had issue two sons,
William and John; William died without issue, and John that married
Anne, the daughter of Sir John Coryton, of Newton, Baronet, by whom he
hath a numerous issue of children of both sexes. After the death of
the said Elizabeth, he married the daughter of Anthony Carveth, of
Peransand, Gent. his cousin-german removed, and hath issue by her
Francis Peter.

Gregory Peter aforesaid was the son of Thomas Peter, of Treater, in
Padstow, Gent. who married the daughter and heir of Mitchell, lord of
Harlyn; the which Thomas Peter was the son of John Peter, of Trenaran,
in Padstow, Gent. that married Toms, as John Peter was the son of John
Peter of Trenaran, that married Kestell.

Whether this surname of Peter be derived from the Christian or font
name of some of their ancestors, or from their being ancient
inhabitants of Pedyrstowe, id est, Peter’s dwelling, now Padstow, I
cannot resolve. Their arms are in a field Gules, on a bend between two
escallops Argent, two Cornish dawes Proper; much resembling the arms
of the Lord Petre of Exeter, now of Essex.

If this church of Merin, or Meran, were extant, it was not endowed
with any revenues at the time of the Inquisition of the Bishops of
Lincoln and Winchester, into the value of Cornish Benefices, 1294,
since it is not named therein. And the five churches of Peran-sand,
St. Agnes, St. Colomb Minor, St. Breock, Lanhidrock, were then under
the same circumstances.

The tutelar guardian of this new church of Merin is St. Thomas Becket,
Archbishop of Canterbury, whose festival is duly celebrated by the
inhabitants of this parish of Meran on July the 7th, being commonly
called his day, a hundred and twenty-two years after his death made a
calendered Saint, who was slain at the altar in his cathedral church
of Canterbury, the 30th of December 1172.

In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, this vicarage of Merin was valued for
its revenues £15. 16_s._ 8_d._ The patronage in the Bishop of Exeter,
or the Dean and Chapter, who endowed it; the incumbent Gurney; the
rectory or sheaf in possession of Francis Peter aforesaid; and the
parish rated to the 4s. per pound Land Tax for one year, 1696, £241.

One Margaret Tregoweth, of Crantock, temp. Henry VII. gave lands in
Harlyn, viz. a dwelling-house and garden, with commons there, towards
the repair of blessed St. Meran and St. Thomas Becket’s church, of
about £12 per annum for ever. [But who this Sanctus Meranus, or St.
Meran, was I know not.]


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin does not add any thing to the history of this parish except
the following assertion.

This parish takes its name from a female patroness, Sancta Merina, so
that the name should be written Merin.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Tonkin has not given any information respecting St Merina, nor is
any such name to be found.

The barton of Harlyn, or Arlyn, belonged to the family of Tregewe;
from that family it passed by a marriage to the family of Michell, and
with the heiress of Michell to Peter. Perthcothen, which belonged to
the family of Trevethen, is now the seat of another Mr. Peter.

The manor of Trevose having formed a part of the very extensive
property acquired by the Roberts’s, was purchased from them by the
Morices of Werington, and in the division of property between the
coheiresses of that family, it fell to the share of Molesworth of
Pencanow; one part of it is held on lease by Mr. Peter, of Harlyn, and
another belonged to the late Mr. Rawlings, of Padstow.

There is not any thing remarkable about the church. The stone in that
immediate neighbourhood, at a place called Catacluse, is very
favourable for building, and for ornamental work, as may be seen in
the fonts at this church and at Padstow, and also in the ruins of the
old church, dedicated to Constantine.

The Editor has been favoured with the following communication
respecting this ancient building, by William Peter, Esq. of Harlyn.

     “Constantine church is now in ruins, and the parish (if it
     ever was one) has been long merged in that of St. Merryn.
     The festival of Constantine is still celebrated by an annual
     hurling match, on which occasion the owner of Harlyn
     supplies, and has (according to parish tradition) from time
     immemorial supplied, the silver ball.

     “Adjoining the church of Constantine was a cottage which a
     family of the name of Edwards held for generations, under
     the proprietors of Harlyn, by the annual render of a pie,
     made of limpets, raisins, and various herbs, on the eve of
     the festival. This pie, as I have heard from my father and
     from more ancient members of the family, and from old
     servants, was excellent. The Edwards’s had pursued for
     centuries the occupation of shepherds on Harlyn and
     Constantine commons. The last died about forty years ago,
     and the wreck of their cottage is almost buried in sand.”

The font and the pillars of Constantine church are handsomely
carved out of Catacluse stone, and Mr. Peter adds, that the font
was transferred by his great-grandfather to St. Merryn Church,
when it underwent a thorough repair.

Under Catacluse Cliffs is a small pier, constructed by the late
Mr. Peter for the shelter of coasting vessels and boats.

The feast of Constantine is kept on the nearest Sunday to the
10th of March.

The feast in honour of the comparatively modern Saint to whom St.
Merryn Church is dedicated, is celebrated on the nearest Sunday
to July the 7th, the Translation of St. Thomas of Canterbury
(Becket).

The great tithes belong to the Chapter of Exeter, and the Bishop
collates to the vicarage. It has been remarked that three
successive gentlemen of the name of Gurney held the living for
above a century.

The diversion of hurling, mentioned by Mr. Peter as taking place
on the festival in honour of Constantine, is now wholly
discontinued, or kept up on this particular occasion as a mere
remembrance of former times, when the manners of society were
more adapted to such rude exertions of activity and strength. For
an account of hurling see Carew, p. 195, Lord Dunstanville’s
edition.

  St. Merran measures 3,644 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.    _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          4,084     0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           428    18    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    425   |    458   |     537    |    576
    giving an increase of 35½ per cent. in 30 years.
  The Rev. John Bayley, the present Vicar of St. Merryn, was collated
    in 1803 by the Bishop of Exeter.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of the southern part of this parish resemble those of St.
Ervan, but near the church a lamelar blue slate prevails, like that of
Endellion, and like it also abounding in veins of the sulphurets of
lead and of antimony.

The western part of the parish, which extends into the sea, forming a
promontory called Trevose Head, is composed of crystalline rocks,
which are massive, and differ from all the rocks that are interposed
between it and the granite of St. Dennis. Both the composition and the
relative situation of these rocks are very interesting. They appear to
be the equivalents of the masses of serpentine of Clicker Tor, and of
the Lizard district; of the felspathic rocks which form the downs
between Launceston and Davidstow; and of that curious mass of rock at
King Arthur’s Castle, in Tintagel. Geologists have yet to learn the
precise relation of these crystalline masses with the calcareous
series in which they are situated.




MERTHYR.


HALS.

Merthyr, Murder, vicarage, is situated in the hundred of Powder, and
hath upon the north and east Probus and Tresilian river, south Lamoran
and St. Michael Penkivell, west an arm of Falmouth Harbour, towards
Clemens. As for the name, it refers to the tutelar patron and guardian
saint of the church, who it seems was murdered and slain for the
Christian religion, as a martyr; viz. one St. Cohan, a Briton of this
parish, whose little well, and consecrated chapel annexed thereto, was
lately extant, upon the lands of Egles Merthyr barton, (that is to say
upon the lands of the Martyr’s Church,) though now in a manner
demolished by greedy searchers for money.

This church goes in presentation and consolidation as a daughter to
St. Probus, which vicar is to present the curate, vicar, or chaplain
of Merthyr to the Bishop for licence and confirmation; though the
eight men of the said parish are by ancient custom to choose and name
him, in consideration whereof the vicar of Probus is to receive
annually from them, on the high altar, three shillings and four pence.

However, great controversies have happened in the Bishop’s Consistory
between the vicar of Probus and the inhabitants of this parish, before
and since Henry the Eighth’s days, upon the death, removal, or
translations of the vicar of Probus, concerning the right of the
jurisdiction, presentation, or patronage of this church; whether in
the vicar of Probus, or the eight men of the said parish, the vicar
presenting one clerk or curate to be confirmed by the Bishop, and the
eight men another; but generally it hath passed as a rule in the
Ecclesiastical Court, where this matter, by learned counsel or
proctors, hath been debated, that the right of patronage and
presentation of this church lay in the eight men of the parish, and
not in the vicar of Probus, though the same hath been often
controverted.

There is a Latin deed which I have seen yet extant, between Bar.
Combe, vicar-general to Dr. Peter Courtenay, Lord Bishop of Exeter,
1480, under seal of the diocese, and John Fullford, perpetual vicar of
Probus of the one part, and Thomas Tresithney, John Hallvose, Thomas
Webber, and others of the eight men of the parish of Merthyr on the
other part, wherein those premises are concerted or regulated; and
moreover, therein a confirmation, covenant, or agreement, made and
established between them, according to ancient custom; that in case
the said eight men and their successors should annually pay to the
vicar or curate of the said parish of St. Cohan Martyr, of Merthyr,
for ever annually the full and just sum of twenty marks lawful moneys
of England, that then the lands of the said parish, and every part and
parcel thereof should be exempt and free from the payment of small
tithes in kind, oblations, or obventions to the vicar thereof for
ever. Which privilege hath ever since been kept and enjoyed by the
inhabitants of the said parish accordingly; to the great loss of the
vicar, and greater gain of the inhabitants.

Now, though when this compact was made and confirmed, the vicar had
much the better bargain, not one vicarage church in Cornwall being of
that value in the King’s or Pope’s Books towards Annats in the first
inquisition, 1294, nor many in Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1520; yet now the
inhabitants have great profit thereby, since the plenty or commonness
of money lessens the intrinsic value thereof, whereby much number of
money will buy but little lands, goods, or chattels, whereas in those
days a little quantity of money would purchase much of those things.
(Witness Baker, and other our chronologers, temp. Henry VII. soon
after the compact aforesaid was made, wherein we may read that a
bushel of wheat, Winchester measure, was sold for 6_d._, a bushel of
salt for 3½_d._, a ton of Gascoign wines 40_s._, and all other things
sold after a proportionable price.)

In the Domesday Book, 1087, this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Penkivell. Afterwards, upon the setting up the
vicarage of Probus, it was concerted into that parish about the
beginning of King Henry the Third’s days; for in the Inquisition of
the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, into the value of Cornish
Benefices, 1294, its superior or mother church was rated for it, as
also the five chaplains for their salaries, that officiated in Probus,
Cornelly, and Merthyr. It was endowed by the treasurer of the
cathedral church of Exeter, which must be after that dignitary was
first set up there, by William Brewar, Bishop thereof 1224. The
patronage as aforesaid; the incumbent, Monsieur Baudree, a French
Protestant; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax,
1696, temp. William III. £83.

At Tre-saws-an, alias Tre-saus-an, id est, the Saxon town, or
dwelling, a place heretofore pertaining to some Saxon, is the
possession by lease of James Hals, Gent., granted him by his mother in
the time of her widowhood, as parcel of the manor of Fentongollan,
whereon she had power of leasing during her widowhood. He was a
younger son of Sir Nicholas Hals, of Fentongollan, Knight, by Grace
his wife, daughter of Sir John Arundell, of Talverne, Knight; and was
first bred a soldier in Pendenis Castle, whereof his father was
Governor, under King James I. and Charles I. Afterwards he was made
lieutenant of his brother Captain William Hals, in the expedition of
the Duke of Buckingham in the French war, at the Isle of Rhé and
Rochelle. And after that war was over was sent with his said brother
by King Charles I. with a foot company of soldiers to supply or
reinforce the garrisons of the Barbadoes, St. Christopher’s, and
Mountserat Islands in America, where he remained about seven years;
and after his brother’s death, who died returning into England,
Captain Ayleworth was displaced, and the said James Hals made Governor
of Mountserat Island, by King Charles I.

After which, the wars breaking out in England, between that King and
his Parliament, he and divers other officers were commanded to return
back into England for the King’s service; where soon after his arrival
at Plymouth, that stood for the Parliament, then besieged by the
King’s army, he was cajoled out of his allegiance to King Charles I.
by his country gentlemen then in that place in garrison, and engaged
against that King, to become Lieutenant-Colonel to Colonel Nicholas
Boscawen’s troop of horse, then posted there. From whence he was
commanded, with several other troops of horse, to go outside the
lines, under conduct of the Earl of Stamford, then Governor of
Plymouth for the Parliament, and to fight the King’s army that
besieged it under conduct of Sir Ralph Hopton, Knight, and Sir Richard
Grenvill, Knight and Baronet, the King’s Generals in the West; where,
after a sharp engagement and loss of many men between both parties,
the victory fell to the King’s army; and then and there the said James
Hals, and many other gentlemen were taken prisoners of war, and
forthwith sent prisoners to Lidford Castle in Devon, under custody of
Marshall Ellery, of St. Colomb Major.

Where soon after several of his companions, or fellow officers and
soldiers, viz. Mr. Leach, Mr. Morris, Mr. Brabyn, and others, were
executed without trial or judgment, as guilty of high treason. But the
said James Hals had his life spared or given him by the General Sir
Richard Grenville, Knight, upon account of consanguinity, but not
without many frowns and angry threats; (a sure token of his clemency,
as his smiles and embraces were of death and destruction, suitable to
those of King Richard III. and King James I. and Caius Caligula,
Emperor of Rome,) to dissuade him from the Parliament service to that
of the King’s, with promise of greater preferment in his army; all
which proving ineffectual, he was sentenced a straight or close
prisoner to that tremendous castle, in daily expectation of death;
where he remained immured up for about twenty months space, in great
want, durance, and misery, till General Essex came into those parts
with the Parliament army, and set at liberty him and other Lidford
prisoners, by Captain Braydon raised the siege of Plymouth, and sore
distressed Hopton and Grenville in Cornwall.

During the time of this James Hals’ imprisonment in Lidford Castle,
amongst others there came to visit him one Mr. Doctor William Brown,
of Tavistock, who gave him a copy of rambling verses and observations
he had made upon the borough and castle of Lidford, for his diversion;
which verses, for want of the original, I find false and imperfectly
set forth and printed in Mr. Prince’s Worthies of Devon, therefore I
have hereunder set it down verbatim from the Doctor’s own copy, given
Mr. Hals, viz.:

  I oft have heard of Lidford Lawe,
  How in the morn they hang and draw,
    And sit in judgment after;
  At first I wondered at it much,
  But since I find the matter such,
    As it deserves noe laughter.

  They have a castle on a hill;
  I took it for some old windmill,
    The vanes blown off by weather;
  To lie therein, one night ’tis gast,
  ’Twere better to be stoned or pressed,
    Or hanged when you come thither.

  Ten men less room within this cave
  Than five mice in a lanthorn have;
    The Keepers they are sly ones;
  If any could devise by art
  To get it up into a cart,
    ’Twere fit to carry lions.

  When I beheld it! Lord thought I,
  What justice, truth, or equity,
    Hath Lidford Castle hall;
  Where every one that there doth stay,
  Must first be hanged out of the way,
    ’Fore he can have his trial.

  Prince Charles a hundred pounds hath sent,
  To mend the leads and planchins wrent,
    Within this living tomb,
  Some forty-five pounds more had paid
  The debts of all that shall be laid
    There till the day of doom.

  One lies there for a seam of malt,
  Another for two pecks of salt,
    Two sureties for a noble;
  If this be true or else false news,
  You may go ask of Master Crew’s,
    John Vaughan, or John Doble.

  Near to those men that lie in lurch,
  There’s a direful bridge and little church,
    Seven ashes and one oak;
  Two houses standing and ten down,
  They say the Rector hath a gown,
    But I saw ne’er a cloak.

  Whereby you may consider well,
  What plain simplicity doth dwell
    At Lidford without bravery;
  Since in that town both young and grave
  Do love the naked truth to have,
    No cloak to hide their knavery.

  This town’s inclosed with desert moors,
  Where tiger, wolf, and lion roars,
    And nought can live but hogs;
  All overturn’d with Noah’s flood;
  Of fourscore miles scarce one foot good;
    Where hills are wholly bogs.

  And near unto the Gubbins Cave,
  A people that no knowledge have
    Of laws of God or men,
  Where Cæsar never yet subdued,
  Have lawless lived, of manners rude,
    All naked in their den.

  By whom, if any pass that way,
  He dares not any time to stay,
    For presently the howl,
  Upon which signal they do muster
  Their naked forces in a cluster,
    Led forth by Roger Rowle.

  The people all within this clime,
  Are frozen in the Winter time,
    Deprest with cold and pain;
  But when the Summer is begun,
  They lie like silkworms in the sun,
    And gather strength again.

  ’Twas told me, in King Cæsar’s time
  The town was built with stone and lime,
    But sure the walls are clay,
  For they are all fallen for ought I see:
  And since the houses are got free
    The town is run away.

  O Cæsar, if thou there didst reign,
  Whilst one house stands come there again;
    (Come quickly whilst there is one)
  For if thou stay, but little fit,
  But five years more, they will commit
    The whole town to a prison.

  To see it thus much grieved was I,
  The proverb saith ’sorrows be dry,’
    So was I at this matter;
  When by good luck, I know not how,
  There thither came a straying cow,
    And we had milk and water.

  To nine good stomachs, with a wig,
  At last we got a tithen pig;
    This diet was our bounds;
  And this was, just as if ’twere known,
  A pound of butter had been thrown
    Among a pack of hounds.

  One glass of drink I got by chance,
  ’Twas Claret when it was in France,
    But then from it much wider;
  I think a man might make as good
  With green crabs boiled in Brazil wood,
    And half a pint of cider.

  I kissed the Mayor’s hand of the town,
  Who though he wears no scarlet gown,
    Honours the Rose and Thistle;
  A piece of coral to the mace,
  Which there I saw to serve in place,
    Would make a good child’s whistle.

  At six o’clock I came away,
  And prayed for those that were to stay
    Within that place so arrant;
  For my part I’ll come there no more,
  Unless it be on better score,
    Or forced by Tin Warrant.

This custom of executing malefactors before trial on common fame, was
also an old law amongst the Germans and Swiss Cantons; and if upon
trial, after execution done on the criminal, he or she appeared to be
innocent, a priest was appointed to pray for his soul. (See Glover’s
Somerset, and Duverdier’s History of the Swiss Cantons.)

The same law was in force amongst the people of Carinthia, a country
adjoining to the Alps and Italy on the south, and Styria on the north;
moreover, if upon the trial three days after the offender’s execution,
he appeared to be guilty, his body should be left so long to hang upon
the gibbet, till his members rotted piecemeal from his body. But if
innocent they took it thence and gave it venerable obsequies, with
prayers, oblations, and alms deed for the salvation of his soul.

This James Hals married Anne, one of the coheirs of John Martin, of
Hurston, Gent. attorney-at-law, (lineally descended from the Martins
of Pittle Town, in Dorset,) by Anne his wife, daughter of John Mundy,
of Rialton, Esq. by Jane his wife, daughter of Walter Kendall, of
Pellyn, Esq.; by whom he had issue James Hals, his eldest son and
heir, that married Martha, daughter and heir of Thomas Penrose, of
Lefeock, Gent. commander of the Bristol, Maidstone, and Monck
frigates, during the several Dutch wars of Oliver Cromwell and King
Charles II. with the States of Holland; by whom he hath issue James
Hals, his eldest son, of Hungerford Park in Berkshire, and Thomas
Hals, bred a gentleman volunteer, upon King William the Third’s ship
the Sunderland, Captain Tudor Trevor, Commander; but being from thence
transferred to the Kingfisher, Captain Tallat, Commander, in order to
go to St. Helena, with other men of war, to convoy home the East India
fleet, the air on the south part of Africa, near the Cape of Good
Hope, not agreeing with his constitution of body, he sickened there of
a consumption and died 1702.

James Hals aforesaid, father of those young men, proved a man of ill
conduct, and wasted all his lands and leases, of a very considerable
value.

James Hals first above-mentioned had also issue William Hals, the
author of these lines, who married three wives, Evans of Landrini
family in Wales, Carveth of Peransand, and Courtney of Tremeer, but
had issue by none of them.

He had also issue Thomas Hals, of the City of London, first bred a
merchant, who married Jane, daughter of Captain Richard Bourchier, of
that city, and hath been a merchant, factor, and traveller in France,
Spain, Portugal, Italy, Venice, Greece, Smyrna, Egypt, Constantinople,
and Alexandria, in which last places he was a factor for several
years; afterwards as merchant he went in an East India ship into
Africa, Persia, Arabia, India, and China, where he died about the year
1710, without issue.

As also Nicholas Hals, bred a scholar, who died at Leskeard, and lies
buried in the minister’s chancel of that church, 1682.

As also Grenvill Hals, that married Martha, daughter of Reginald
Hawkey, Gent. attorney-at-law, of Trevego, but died also without
issue, 1718, and lies buried in Fentongollan Isle, in St. Michael
Penkivell church, near his father and mother’s graves.

As also Henry Hals, bred a merchant, who for several years was a
factor at Constantinople and Alexandria. But coming back into England
to marry the only daughter and heir of one Doctor Cooke, at London, to
whom long before he had been contracted, he sickened of the small-pox,
died there, and lies buried at Stepney or Whitechapel, 1689.

Anne, married first to William Roscorla, of Roscorla in St. Austell;
and after his death to Thomas Penrose, of Nance, in St. Martin’s in
Kerryer, but hath issue by neither. She died in the year ――――, and
lies buried in the north isle or chapel of St. Wenn church, in
Cornwall.

At Trewortha Vean, in this parish, that is the little higher town, by
lease, is the dwelling of Joseph Halsey, clerk, Master of Arts, and
some time Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, and rector of St.
Michael Penkivell church, in this county; lineally descended from the
Halseys of Huntingdonshire, whose arms are Argent, a pile between
three griffons’ heads erased Sable, out of a supposed allusion to
their name, derived from Alce and Sey. He married Mary, daughter of
Henry Vincent, of Tresimple, Gent. attorney-at-law, by whom he had
issue Joseph Halsey, practitioner in physic, who took the degree of
Doctor beyond the seas, at Leyden in Holland I take it. He now
resideth at London, where he married ――――, and hath got himself
considerable wealth and reputation in his profession. He had also
issue Nathaniel Halsey, bred a merchant, and is now a factor for the
East India Company, at Bombay or Bengal in India; also Edward Halsey,
of the same occupation, now a factor for the said Company at Surat, or
some other part of India; also a daughter, married to Bromley, of
Lefeock, a Presbyterian priest.

This Mr. Joseph Halsey being ordained priest, was made rector of the
parish aforesaid, in the interregnum of Oliver and Richard Cromwell,
after the discipline of Calvin, or Geneva.


TONKIN.

This is a daughter church to St. Probus, with which and Cornelly it is
valued in the King’s Book.

The vicar of Probus names the curate, but cannot remove him
afterwards. The present curate, who holds both this and Cornelly, is
Mr. Jonathan Daddoe.

The manor of Fentongollan comprehends a great part of this parish, but
the mansion house is in St. Michael Penkivell.


THE EDITOR.

Trevilian bridge is the most remarkable spot in this parish. It is
situated in a beautiful valley, with a fine stream navigable for
barges from Falmouth, which conveys large quantities of limestone from
Plymouth, and of coast sand dredged in Falmouth harbour.

In consequence also of the new line of road, completed about four
years ago from Bodmin, and therefore from London to Truro, through
Ladock valley, the Earl of Falmouth has made a private road to his own
house, from the eastern end of this bridge, equal perhaps in beauty to
any drive of an equal extent in the whole county. Some fairs are
annually holden at this place, and it is recorded in history as the
place where the treaty was agreed on for the surrender of the army of
about five thousand men, commanded by Lord Hopton, then lying in
Truro, to the troops of General Fairfax, on the 14th of March 1646.

The church is very small, and, what is quite unusual in Cornwall, has
a wooden edifice, it cannot be called a tower, to contain its single bell.

  Merthyr measures 1,492 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2103    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           230    8    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    305   |    350   |     370    |    411
    giving an increase of 35 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish is composed of the same rocks as St. Clement’s, from which
it is divided by one of the streams communicating with Falmouth
harbour.




MEVAGISSEY, OR MENA-GUISE-Y.


HALS.

Mena-guise-y vicarage is situated in the hundred of Powder, and hath
upon the north St. Mewan, east St. Austell, south the British Channel,
west Gurran. For the modern name it may be interpreted either the hill
custom; otherwise, Mena-gusseg, after the Welsh, is the hill and waves
or surges of the sea.

I know Mr. Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall, (contrary to this
etymology) tells us that this church is called Menaguisey from its two
tutelar guardian Saints, Meny and Isey; query who they are or were,
for in the Agonal, or Legend, I can find no such Saints; besides, in
the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, into the
value of benefices in Cornwall, 1294, Ecclesia de la Mor-ike, in
decanatu de Powdre, (which must be this church) that is to say the
church of the sea cove, lake, or creek place, is valued at 40_s._ In
Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, it is called Menage-zey church, with the
appellation of Saint, and rated £6. The patronage formerly in
Bodrigan, now Edgecumb; the incumbent Mitchell; the rectory I take it
in Edgecumb; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax,
1696, £151. 13_s._

In the Domesday Book, 1087, this district or parish was taxed either
under the jurisdiction of Pentewan, or Goran, now on the east and west
side thereof.

Penwarne in this parish heretofore, if not now, the voke lands of some
manor, (as I take it still it is,) gave name and original to an old
family of gentlemen, surnamed de Penwarne; whose daughter and heir,
together with herself, carried those lands to Cosowarth, by whose
heiress it passed to Otwell Hill, Esq. that married Denham, descended
from the Hills of Lancashire; who gave for his arms, Gules, a chevron
between three garbs Ermine; from whose heir it passed, by sale or
descent, to John Carew, merchant, that married Hellman, who by her had
issue only five daughters: 1. married to Lewis Tremayne, of Halligan,
Esq.; 2. Candia, to Hugh Trevanion, of Treligan, Esq.; 3. Grace, the
youngest daughter, was married to Robert Hoblyn, of Nanswiddon, Esq.;
4. to his second brother Richard Hoblyn, of Antron, Esq.
barrister-at-law; 5. to Edward Hoblyn, of Bodmin, attorney-at-law.

The which gentlemen, in order to raise their marriage fortunes, sold
those lands to Arthur Fortescue, of Filleigh, in Devon, Esq. lineally
descended from Sir John Fortescue, Knight, Lord Chief Justice and Lord
High Chancellor of England, temp. Henry VI. 1442.

Tre-levan, or Tre-lauan, was formerly the lands of Trewoolla, of
Trewoolla, in Gorran; it is now the dwelling of Henry Vincent, Esq.
barrister-at-law, and member of parliament for the borough of Truro.


TONKIN.

The church, which is a very indifferent low building, consists of a
nave only, with one north aisle and a cross aisle to the south. There
was formerly a square tower at the western end with three bells, which
being something out of repair, they pulled it down in the rebellious
times, and sold the bells, which turned (as all such sacrilegious
actions ought to do) to the utter undoing of all those concerned in
it; there remaineth however one bell in that part of the tower which
is standing, even in height with the roof of the church.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Tonkin has written much more on this parish than on most others,
but the details relative to families, and to individuals long since
forgotten, and never of any distinction, are quite uninteresting.

Mr. Lysons has abridged it to the following effect, intermixed with
additions of his own.

Tonkin says that Mevagissey, lately a poor fishing village, contained
in his time two hundred houses; that a pier had been constructed at
the expense of the Trewolla family; that it was the most convenient
place on the coast for the pilchard fishery; that on an average twelve
thousand hogsheads were cured annually. The present number of houses
is about 370. The eastern part of the town, which in old deeds is
called Porthilly, belongs to the Hoblyns; the middle part to the
Grenvilles, of Stowe in Buckinghamshire, as parcel of the manor of
Trelevan; the western part is included in Mr. Tremayne’s manor of
Penwarne.

Ships of 100 tons burden may ride securely in the pool. The fishing
cove of Porthmellin is partly in this parish.

The manor of Trelevan belonged for several generations to the family
of Trewolla, of Trewolla in St. Goran. It was by them sold, about the
year 1667, to Walter Vincent, Esq. of Truro, who in 1680 was appointed
one of the Barons of the Exchequer, but died on his way to London
before he had been sworn into that high office. His grandson Nicholas
Vincent, who died in 1726, mortgaged this estate, the manor of
Tregavethan in Kenwyn, and the greater part of his property, to John
Knight, Esq. of Gosfield Hall in Essex. This gentleman’s widow married
Lord Nugent, whose only daughter and heiress carried the whole to the
Grenvilles, now Dukes of Buckingham.

The barton of Trelevan was successively the seat of the families of
Croome and Stevens, as lessees under the Trewollas. The Vincents,
having bought in the lease, made it their residence; and, after the
decease of the last of the Vincent’s, Mr. Tonkin resided there for
some time, being the heir-at-law, but the property was too much
incumbered for him to retain the freehold.

The manor of Pentuan was the property and its barton the chief seat of
the Pentires, after they removed from Pentire in Endellion. The
heiress of Pentire married Roscarrock, from whom this estate passed by
a marriage to the Darts, of Dart Ralph in Devonshire, who sold it to
Robarts, of Lanhidrock; and the last Earl of Radnor bequeathed it to
Mr. James Laroche, a merchant of Bristol, afterwards created a
Baronet. This gentleman becoming insolvent, sold the manor, together
with a large property scattered over Cornwall, to a friend, who soon
afterwards dying restored the whole by his will; but in a little
while, and as it would seem with the intention of guarding against the
possibility of a similar occurrence, the estate was sold a second time
in parcels; when this manor of Pentire was purchased by the late Mr.
Tremayne, of Heligon, and the barton, which was reserved by Mr. Dart
when he sold the manor, has descended to Mr. Tremayne from that
family.

The manor of Penwarne belonged to an ancient family of that name.
Vivian Penwarne, who died in the reign of Henry the Seventh, left
three daughters, coheiresses, married to Cosworth, Penhallow, and
Penwarne, of Penwarne in Mawnan. The elder daughter inherited this
manor, which passed in marriage with the heiress of Coswarth to Alan
Hill, Esq. There is a monument in the church to his son Otwell Hill,
of Penwarne; after his death the estate passed to a nephew, Mr. John
Carew, second son of Richard Carew, of Anthony, the Historian of
Cornwall.

Mr. John Carew distinguished himself at the siege of Ostend, in 1601,
where he lost his right hand by a cannon ball. His only son John died
in 1640, leaving five sisters, one of whom married Fortescue, in whom
this property continued till within recent times: it is now, however,
sold in lots.

The barton of Trewincy, sometime a leasehold seat of the Sprys, is now
a farmhouse, the property of Mr. Tremayne.

The vicarage is endowed with the great tithes of about one third part
of the parish. The remainder of the great tithes has gone with the
manor of Treleven to the Grenvelles. The patronage of the vicarage
belongs to the Edgcumbe family, of Mount Edgcumbe; the whole were
formerly appropriated to the college of Glaseney at Penryn.

Mevagissey is one of the principal stations for taking of pilchards by
seine nets, if it is not the very first. The bay is sheltered, free
from rocks, and of a depth which allows the leads on one edge of the
net to rest on the smooth sand at the bottom, while the other edge is
raised to the surface by corks.

All fish are by custom in this parish liable to tithes, which are
payable to the vicar, and amount in some years to much more than the
ordinary income of the living.

The vicarage house is very pleasantly situated in a valley rising from
the town, and the whole glebe received great improvements from the
late vicar, Doctor Lyne, a gentleman of much respectability, but most
distinguished by his singularities; among other fancies, he
entertained such strong apprehensions and fear of contagion, as not to
touch even gold coin till it had been flung into water; but this
caution seems to have been compensated by a subsequent attachment to
the precious metal, as several thousand pounds in specie were found in
his house.

A market is held in Mevagissey on Saturdays.

  This parish measures 1222 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          4,589    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                         1,383    6    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {   2052   |   2225   |    2450    |   2169
    giving an increase of not quite 6 per cent. in 30 years.
  But there appears an extraordinary decrease of population in the
    last ten years. In twenty years the increase was 19½ per cent.
    very nearly, which, continued for thirty years, would have given
    30½ per cent.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. John Arscott, presented in 1824 by the Earl
    of Mount Edgcumbe.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The geological structure of this parish is the same as those of the
adjacent parishes St. Eve and Gorran.




ST. MEWAN.


HALS.

St. Mewan rectory is situate in the hundred of Powder, and hath upon
the north St. Stephen’s and Roach, east St. Austell, south Mevagissey,
and south-west Creed.

In the Domesday Book this district was taxed either under the
jurisdiction of Branell, Tybesta, Towington, or Refishoe, perhaps now
Lefisick. In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester
into the value of Cornish Benefices, 1294, Ecclesia de St. Mewany in
decanatu de Powdre, was rated 40_s._; in Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521,
£10. The patronage in Hamley, formerly in the prior of Tywardreth, who
endowed it; the incumbent Mitchell; and the parish rated to the 4_s._
per pound Land Tax, 1696, temp. William III. £91. 6_s._ 4_d._

Pol-godh, Pol-goth, is in this parish. Out of which mine hath been
taken up, in less than forty years’ space, about five hundred thousand
pounds weight of tin; to the great enriching the labourers,
adventurers, bond-owners, and lords of the fee or soil; the same lying
for the most part in coarse wastrell ground, therefore boundable, in a
valley between two lofty hills. Sir John Arundell, of Lanherne,
knight, one of the lords of the soil, did for about twenty years space
receive alone one thousand pounds per annum free to his part, as the
fifth dish of black tin there made, and other lords proportionable
quantities of tin or money, as interested in the lands thereof.

Lefisick in this parish, which I take to be that Refishoc taxed in the
Domesday Book, is the dwelling of ―――― Edwards, Gent. that married
Bedford.


TONKIN.

The patronage of this parish is in John Hawkins, D.D. for two turns in
four; in Lewes Tremayne, of Heligan, Esq. for one turn; and in Robert
Hoblyn, of Nanswiddan, Esq. for the other. The incumbent Mr. William
Hambly; since Mr. May; who dying in this present year, 1732, has been
succeeded by Mr. Paget, at the presentation of Mr. Hoblyn, whose turn
it happened to be.

The manor of Trewoone. This signifies the dwelling in the downs, or
croft, a name suitable to the situation of the place, and of the
pretty large village which has grown up in this manor.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals has given several etymologies of the word Mewan, but so
little probable as not to merit attention. It may be the name of a
missionary, as is the case in so many other parishes.

The church does not present any thing remarkable, except a pleasing
appearance among trees at a short distance north of the turnpike road
leading from Truro to St. Austell, just where a hill has been lowered,
and a valley raised within these few years, to the very great
improvement of the line of communication westward from Plymouth. A son
of our eminently distinguished countryman Doctor William Borlase, was
presented to this living by Mr. Christopher Hawkins, of Trewinnard.
His grandson is now at the head of that ancient family.

The object of most curiosity in this parish is Polgeoth mine, one of
those wrought through the greatest length of time, and with the
greatest produce of tin, in the whole county.

Pol-gooth is in Cornish the old pit or mine. Mr. Hals mentions, as a
matter of astonishment, its having produced above five hundred
thousand pounds weight of tin in less than forty years, and that it
paid a fifth dish or share to the proprietor of the soil. Nothing can
more clearly evince the enlarged scale of working in modern times;
500,000 pounds weight of tin in forty years would give an average of
12,500 pounds weight for each year, and at the recent price of four
pounds sterling for a hundred weight of tin, about £2,200 a year. In
some of the later workings perhaps thirty or forty thousand pounds
have been expended in an outfit, or what is called bringing the mine
into a course of working, in the purchase of steam engines, and of
various other elaborate machines; and instead of paying a fifth part
of whatever minerals are raised, free of expense to the proprietors of
the soil, an eighteenth or perhaps a twenty-fourth share is all that
can reasonably be demanded or afforded after such an outlay of
capital, which small share, however, usually amounts to a greater
value than did the fifth or sixth part received in former times.

The manor and village of Burngullo belonged to the Robarts’s, of
Lanhidrock, and have descended to Mrs. Agar.

The manor of Trewoon belongs partly to the family of Hawkins, and
partly to Tremayne and Hoblyn.

  St. Mewan measures 2,240 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1633    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           322   18    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    780   |    626   |    1174    |   1306
    giving an increase of 67 per cent. in 30 years.
  The fluctuations in amount of population in this parish are owing to
    the occasional working or discontinuance of Polgooth mine.
  Present Rector, the Rev. William Hocker, jun. instituted in 1801.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The northern part of this parish extends over the central mass of
granite, in the form of a long narrow stripe, the base of which is
about one mile north of the church. All the remainder of the parish
consists of compact and schistose felspar rocks, traversed by beds of
porphyry, and intersected by numerous veins of tin and copper, more
particularly of tin. On the whole, this parish bears a very close
geological resemblance to St. Austell.

     See p. 401 of this Volume.




ST. MICHAEL CARHAYES.


HALS.

St. Michael Cary-hayes rectory, is situate in the hundred of Powder,
and hath upon the north Creed and St. Ewe, south the British Ocean,
east Goran, west Verian.

In the Domesday Tax, 1087, this parish was taxed under the names of
Cari-crougi. At the time of the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln
and Winchester, into the value of Cornish Benefices, 1294, this church
was not endowed, if extant; afterwards it was, by the Cornwalls,
Hendowers, or Tregarthins, of Court in Branell, and dedicated to God
in the name and honour of St. Michael the Archangel; which gentlemen
afterwards wholly impropriated or appropriated their churches of St.
Stephen’s in Branell, and St. Denis, to the rector of this St. Michael
Carhayes; the patronage now in Tanner; the incumbent Tanner. In
Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, the rectory of those three churches was
valued at £27. 10_s._ 6½.; the vicarages £14. This parish was rated to
the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, temp. William III. 1696, by the name of
St. Michael Cary-hayes, £64. 8_s._

Tre-vanion, alias Tre-vanyon, in this parish, which place gave name
and original to an old British and knightly family of gentlemen,
surnamed de Trevanyon, now in possession thereof, and also of
Cary-hayes aforesaid; which latter came to those gentlemen’s ancestors
by marriage with the daughter and heir of Arundell, lord thereof,
temp. Edward III.; since which time they have flourished, at
Cary-hayes and Trevanion in great fame, wealth, and reputation in
their country. Who have also had bestowed upon them, as tradition
saith, by their princes, for their good services, the lands of several
rebels and traitors, forfeited by attainder of treason, in those
parts; in the York and Lancaster wars, and Flamock’s, Arundell’s, and
other Cornish rebellions.

Of this family was Witte, or William, Trevanion, esq. Sheriff of
Cornwall 17 Henry VII. 1503; Witte, or Sir William, Trevanion, knight,
was Sheriff of Cornwall the 8th of Henry VIII. 1517; Hugh Trevanion,
esq. was Sheriff of Cornwall 19 Henry VIII.; Sir William Trevanion,
knight, that married Edgcumbe, was Sheriff of Cornwall 23d of Henry
VIII. He had issue Hugh Trevanion, esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 34th of
Henry VIII. 1543; he had issue Hugh Trevanion, esq. Sheriff of
Cornwall 6th of Elizabeth, 1564; who had issue Charles Trevanion, esq.
that married the daughter and heir of Witchalse, descended from Benet
Witchalse, Steward of Exeter 1440, Sheriff of Cornwall 37th of
Elizabeth, 1595; he had issue by her Charles Trevanion, esq. Sheriff
of Cornwall 9 Charles I. and by him knighted; who had issue John
Trevanion, esq. that married Anne, daughter of John Arundell, of
Trerice, esq. slain on the part of King Charles I. at Lansdown; by
whom he had issue Amey, married to Joseph Sawle, esq. and Charles
Trevanion, esq. Member of Parliament for Tregony, that married one of
the coheirs of Sir William Drummond, knight, by the daughter and heir
of Sir Nicholas Lower, of St. Wenow, knight; by whom he had issue John
Trevanion, esq. twice chosen one of the Shire Knights for this county
in Parliament, now living, that married Anne, daughter of Sir Francis
Blake, knight. Charles Trevanion, esq. had also issue a son, educated
beyond the seas, who entered into Holy Orders after the doctrine and
discipline of Rome, as I am informed.

The arms of these gentlemen are, in a field Argent, a fess Azure,
charged with three escallops Or, between two chevronels Gules; which
arms I suppose heretofore were the arms of two distinct families, and
for some peculiar reason united.


TONKIN.

This parish has its name from the Archangel, conjoined to that of the
principal place in it.


THE MANOR OF CARHAYES.

The name of this place is derived from caer, a castle, a house, or
dwelling, and hay a hazel hedge, as the situation does plainly make
out; and did much more so before the great alterations which Mr.
Trevanion hath lately made here.

I have reason to believe that this place was part of Carminow’s lands,
and that it came into the Arundell family on the match with Jane, the
eldest daughter of Sir Thomas Carminow, in the reign of Edward the
Third. Of this family, in recent times, Col. John Trevanion was killed
in his father’s lifetime, at the head of his regiment before Bristol,
whose character may be seen in Clarendon. His father, Sir Charles
Trevanion, was a very worthy honest gentleman, and suffered much for
the king’s cause, to the great detriment of his estate, and dying
before the Restoration, lived not long enough to have those amends
made to his family, which his own merits and their losses deserved.
Col. John Trevanion married Anne, daughter of John Arundell, of
Trerice, esq. by whom he had a numerous issue, and among the rest
Richard Trevanion, a famous sea commander, under King Charles the
Second, and King James the Second, with which last he went to France,
and died there in exile. The said Anne, his mother, was afterwards
remarried to Sir John Arundell, of Lanherne, by whom she had not any
issue.

Sir Charles Trevanion was succeeded by his grandson, of the same name,
who first married the daughter and coheir of Sir Adam Drummond, by the
heiress of the Lowers of St. Winnow, and had two sons. He died on the
night of the great storm, Nov. 26, 1703; being succeeded by his eldest
son, John Trevanion, who first married Anne, one of the daughters and
coheirs of Sir Francis Blake, of Ford Castle in Northumberland, by
whom he had no issue; and secondly Barbara, the daughter of William
Lord Berkeley of Stratton, by whom he has one son William, and two
daughters, all very young. Mr. John Trevanion has been three times
elected knight of the shire for this county, in the 9th and 12th of
Queen Ann, and in the 1st of King George the First.

He has bestowed a great deal of money in buildings, gardens, &c. on
this place; but as there is nothing of regularity observed, it may
more properly be called a pleasant romantic seat than a complete
habitation; and although it faces the south, yet it lies too much
under an hill, and is therefore cold and damp in winter. The house
anciently stood to the north of the present, towards the brow of the
hill, according to my opinion in a far better situation. The place
where it was built is still called the haller, that is the hall; but
the odd desire of our ancestors to settle in our vallies, and to get,
as they called it, in _the luthe_, inclined one of the Arundells to
remove the house to where it now stands, and that was done so long
since that nothing remains but the name to point out this ancient
dwelling.

Trevanion, formerly written Trevagnion, that is, the town or dwelling
in an hollow, gave name and was the ancient inheritance of this very
eminent family, which they left on their marriage with Arundell’s
heiress, for Carhayes. The house at Trevanion is now so wholly
destroyed, that it would be hard to guess where it stood, had not the
footsteps of two or three ways leading towards it pointed out the
former situation. The park is at this place, and not at Carhayes,
being well wooded, and having a fine river flowing through it. A
portion of the park is in the parish of Gorran, called by the name of
Porown Berry, and paying a quit-rent to the duchy manor of Trevennen,
out of which it plainly appears to have been taken.

Hurris, or Herys, was formerly the seat of a knightly family, of which
family I believe was Henricus de Herys, mentioned by Carew to have
held a knight’s fee in the reign of Richard the First.

Near to this place is Treberrick, the fruitful or fertile town.
Treberrick in this parish (for there is another place of the same name
in St. Ewe) carries with it not only the advowson of St. Michael
Carhayes, but also of St. Stephen’s, and St. Dennis in Branwell. It
was sold by John Tanner, esq. to Charles Trevanion, of Carhayes. This
place is now the seat, under lease, of Simon Slade, gent. a younger
brother of the late Mr. William Slade, of Trevennen. Mr. Simon Slade
was twice married, first to one of the daughters of Mr. Thomas
Hancock, of Pengelly in Creed, and not having any surviving children,
he married secondly the daughter of Stephen Thomas, of Tregamena in
Verian, gent. by whom he has two sons and two daughters.

The church is but small: being seated however on a hill, it is a good
sea mark. This church consists of a nave, a south aisle extending
about half its length, a north cross aisle, and a small confessionary
to the north of the chancel. The tower is low and without pinnacles,
provided with three bells.

A broken flat stone in the chancel has this inscription round its
margin:

Here lyeth the bodie of Mr. Zacharie Hooker, of this parish rector,
who was buried yᵉ XXV day of Nov. 1643.

On the middle of the stone,

  Si genus aut nomen quæras, insignia monstrant:
    Si vitam, aut mortem, sat pia facta docent.
  Non opus est tumulo, cujus tot viva sepulchra
    Commemorant meritum, terra quot ora tenet.

At the end of the verses is an achievement, containing the arms of
Hooker, with several quarterings.


THE EDITOR.

The ancient and respectable family of Trevanion, like all others able
to trace themselves back, in influential situations, to remote
periods, has experienced the vicissitudes arising from civil
dissensions. In those times it is quite clear, that love of plunder,
and eagerness after confiscations, must have been the sole motives of
action on either side; since, trifling as have been the causes of
domestic as well as of foreign wars, no one can believe that, in the
absence of all contested political principles, men could be found who
would deluge their country with blood for the sake of seating on the
throne an individual whose name was Edward instead of another
designated as Henry, on the frivolous pretence, that, had England been
a farm, and its inhabitants farm stock, one of the parties possessed a
claim through females superior to the other, if it were not defeated
by legal fiction, or by the lapse of time.

In such a conflict three families at the least from Cornwall were
engaged, Bodrigan, Trevanion, and Edgecumbe; and when Richard the
Third obtained sovereign power, on the division which then look place
in the York faction, Bodrigan endeavoured to seize the property of
Edgcumbe, with little respect, as it would seem, for the life of the
possessor; but in the final struggle at Bosworth Field, where Henry
Tudor put an entire end to this contest for power under the guise of
property, by seizing the whole to himself, Trevanion and Edgcumbe had
the good fortune to appear on the winning side, and subsequently
availed themselves to the utmost of belligerent rights against
Bodrigan, as he had attempted to do before against them. The last of
that family was driven from his home, and seems to have perished in
exile. His property was divided between the two families opposed to
him, and after the lapse of three hundred and fifty years continues to
form a large portion of their respective possessions.

At a subsequent period, when wars were levied in support of
principles, and when men of honour and of virtue engaged on either
side, as their early prejudices, investigations, or accidental
experience induced them to believe that one or the other would prove
most conducive to the public good――the Trevanions were less
successful. They asserted their conviction in arms, that the country
would be best governed by concentrating hereditary power in a single
man; and Mr. John Trevanion, bearing a Colonel’s commission, shared in
the military glories of the western army, and fell under the walls of
Bristol. His father experienced the mitigated fate of those who were
vanquished in this contest, by compounding for his estate; and when,
after a long interval, his friends came again into power, and
succeeded in placing at the head of affairs the son of their former
chief, those immediately surrounding the seat of government possessed
but slender means, and still less inclination, to risk their own
safety by indemnifying those at a distance, who had suffered in the
Good Old Cause.

The grandson obtained however the popular reward of representing
Cornwall in parliament; and the Editor has in his possesssion a letter
addressed by Mr. John Trevanion to his great uncle Mr. Henry Davies, a
hundred and twenty-five years ago, declaring his readiness to spend
his fortune and to shed his blood, as his ancestors had done, in
support of the same cause. This gentleman died in 1740, leaving
William Trevanion his son and heir, and two daughters, the eldest of
whom married John Bettesworth, LL.D. Dean of the Arches, and the
younger married Admiral John Byron, well known in his younger days by
a narrative of the disastrous expedition of the Wager Store ship,
commanded by Captain Cheep, as a part of the fleet conducted by
Commodore Anson round the promontory of South America, in the year
1740, and of his own adventures after the ship was wrecked on the
coast of Patagonia, the dead reckoning giving them an erroneous
longitude of fifteen degrees to the west, till his return in 1746.
Admiral Byron is now better known as grandfather to the most popular
of recent poets.

William Trevanion served in parliament for the borough of Tregoney,
and died in 1767 without children, when the male line of this family
became extinct. He was succeeded by Mr. John Bettesworth, his sister’s
son, and his son John Trevanion Purnel Bettesworth Trevanion, esq. is
now the possessor of Carhayes, where he has substituted a magnificent
gothic castle, after a plan of Nash, the architect of Buckingham
Palace and of Regent Street, for the house described by Mr. Tonkin.

Mr. Trevanion married early in life, and was left a widower with
several children. He has for his second wife Miss Burdett, daughter of
the individual to whom the country mainly owes the great alteration in
the constitution of its government, on the ultimate effects of which
no one is yet qualified to form even a conjecture, still less an
opinion.

The family of Bettesworth have been settled on the manor of Fyning, a
part of Rogate parish in Sussex, since about the year 1570; and a
pedigree of nine descents is given in Dallaway’s History of the Rape
of Chichester, ending with Thomas Bettesworth, who assumed the name of
Bilson in 1740, and died in 1754, aged 58. This gentleman bequeathed a
life interest in his property to Thomas Bettesworth, of Chithurst, and
after his decease gave it to Henry Legge, fourth son of William Legge,
first Earl of Dartmouth, on condition of taking the name of Bilson.

Mr. Henry Bilson Legge married Mary Stawel, daughter and heir of
Edward Stawel, Lord Stawel, and was in consequence himself created
Lord Stawel in 1760. They were succeeded by their son Henry Stawel
Bilson Legge, who died in 1820.

The parish of Rogate is situated between Petersfield and Midhurst, on
the bank of a small river, which (after watering Selborne, a name made
familiar to every one by the admirable work of its vicar, Mr. White,)
flows into the county of Sussex, and joining the Arun, finally reaches
the sea through Arundale, a name mistaken by the Normans for that of a
swallow.

The manor of Fyning belonged to a monastery of Premonstratensian
Canons, founded at Dureford, an adjacent parish, about the year 1160,
by Henry Hosatus, or Husey, and augmented three hundred years
afterwards by Henry Guldeford. It was surrendered to King Henry the
Eighth, by John Simpson, the last superior. Temporary grants were made
of the lands, till they were finally bestowed in fee on Sir Edmund
Merwyn, a gentleman of Sussex, from whose descendants they passed to
the Bettesworths.

In the church of St. Michael Carhayes are several monuments to the
Trevanions, and pieces of armour, the trophies of former days; also a
sword, believed to have been the very one used by Sir Hugh Trevanion
at Bosworth Field.

Etymologies, deceptive at all times, become so in a tenfold degree
when they are sought in the varying pronunciations of an unwritten
language. But car, caer, &c. are known (like Rocca in the Italian) to
mean a fortress, a castellated house, a dwelling; and hay, running
colloquially into hayes, is an enclosed fence or yard. Carhayes may
therefore signify the castle surrounded by a basse court or enclosure.

Although Carhayes is several miles detached from the two adjoining
parishes of St. Stephen and St. Dennis, yet it forms with them one
united benefice, purchased by Mr. Pitt, with the other Mahon property.
This more than usually improper association cannot by possibility
escape the attention of those, who are engaged in reforming such
abuses as may have crept into our Church Establishment.

  This parish measures 815 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815,         1,114    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           188    9    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {     86   |    104   |     174    |    197
    giving an increase of 129 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Charles Trevanion Kempe, presented in 1806
    by Arthur Kempe, esq.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is composed of the series of rocks extending over the
adjoining parishes of St. Ewe and Gorran.




ST. MICHAEL PENKEVIL.


HALS.

St. Michael Penkevil rectory is situate in the hundred of Powder, and
hath upon the north and east Merther and Lammoran, and is otherwise
wholly encompassed with the sea arm of Falmouth harbour, that extends
towards Tregony, Truro, and Tresilian bridges. At the time of the
Norman Conquest there was an endowed church extant in this place, for
then this district was taxed under the jurisdiction of Penkevil, of
which more under. Neither had it any other appellation at the time of
the Inquisition into the value of Cornish Benefices, so often
mentioned, 1294, than Ecclesia de Penkevill, in decanatu de Powdre;
and was valued at 40_s._ Which probably was extant, as aforesaid,
before the Norman Conquest, and held its name to that time; but
afterwards, when the present church was rebuilt or augmented in the
place thereof in the form of a cross, and was one of the quarter
cathedrals of the Cornish diocese, it was then dedicated to God in the
name of St. Michael the Archangel, and is commonly called St. Michael
Penkivell church, as under. In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, it was
valued for its first fruits £9. 14_s._ 0½. The patronage formerly in
Tregago, Trenowth, Carmenow, Hals, now Boscawen; the incumbent
Hillman; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1596,
temp. William III. £83. 8_s._ by the name of St. Michael Penkivell.
This church of St. Michael was endowed by the Fentongollans, or de
Tregagos, lords of the manor of Fentongollan, upon whose lands it was
built (out of which is since taken the manor of Tregothnan), who also
at their own proper cost and charges, built the south chapel or aisle
thereof, as a peculiar to them and their families, and obliged those
lands for ever to repair the same, (both over and under) as they still
do. Besides this they founded in this church a chantry, together with
a convent house in the churchyard still extant, for the chanter’s
residence; and endowed the same with competent lands for their
subsistence, to pray for the souls of them and their ancestors, that
after death they might be delivered from the flames of purgatory, and
transported into heaven; now these funeral songs or offices for the
dead are commonly called obits.

By the statute 27 Henry VIII. also 1 Edward VI. all chantrys,
colleges, free chapels and hospitals, were given to the king; at which
time John Carmenow, esq. obtained by gift or purchase the grant of
this chantry from the crown, and annexed it, together with its lands
and revenues, to the manor of Fentongollan, out of which at first it
was taken; all of which at length John Hals, esq. lord of the manor,
together with the patronage of this church, sold to Hugh Boscawen,
esq. temp. Charles II.

Fenton-gollan, Venton gollan, was and is the voke lands of a
considerable manor, which heretofore comprehended the whole parishes
of St. Michael Penkevil and Merther; except the tenements of
Penkevill, Tregothnan, (Treganyan, Penhell, Eglesmerther, and some
others,) now as above subdivided into the manors of Tregothnan and
Fentongollan; which latter had heretofore upon its lands many large
and commodious houses, as halls, parlours, and dining rooms, a notable
tower and bell, three stories high, and a chapel adjoining thereto for
divine service, and two large gatehouses at each end of the town,
which fabric the writer hereof hath often seen in his youth, when his
grandmother lived in it, and enjoyed the same lordship, together with
the manor of Bohurro, alias St. Anthony, as her jointure or freehold
for life. But now, alas! since her death, those lands have been sold
and transferred to several persons by her son John Hals, and those
houses are all pulled down, and the chief stones thereof carried to
build the gates and houses of Tregothnan.

This lordship, as I have been informed, soon after the Norman Conquest
passed from the family from thence denominated de Fentongollan, to
that of Tregaga, or Tresaga aforesaid, who for many generations were
gentlemen of great fame and wealth, and in all probability were so
denominated from Tregaga, or Tregage, house and tower, or castle, yet
extant at Ruan Lanyhorne.

In the rector’s chancel or chapel of this church is yet to be seen a
marble tombstone, with this inscription on it: Here lieth the body of
John Trembraze, Master of Art and Law, and sometime rector of this
church, who departed this life 12 November 1503, upon whose soul Jesus
have mercy. Trembraze is a place in Leskeard parish.

This church, as I said before, being a quarter cathedral to the Bishop
of Exeter, the old bells in this tower of St. Michael Penkevil were
baptized, as appears from their names subscribed in them, St. Michael
and St. Mary; the manner of which baptizing bells was thus: After the
bell was cast and set up in the tower, the suffragan bishop called the
chief inhabitants of the parish together to be godfathers and
godmothers of the bell; who all holding the rope in their hand after
prayers, the suffragan demanded the name of the bell of them, which
being given he sprinkles water upon him or it, saying, “Michael, I
baptise thee in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; be thou henceforth efficacious in driving thunder, lightning,
evil spirits, and tempest, from the living and the dead in this
place;” whereupon the gossips toll the bell; having prepared a new
white garment, then put it upon the bell (as was used to be done
amongst new baptized Christians of the primitive church) afterwards a
great banquet is prepared by the gossips for the suffragan, his
chaplains, and ministers, who are there fed and rewarded. Now it is a
doubtful question amongst the canonists whether the gossips to such
bells may marry with each other afterwards by canonical law. (See also
to this purpose Fox’s Acts and Monuments, temp. Henry VIII. p. 84.)


TONKIN.

St. Michael Penkevil is in the hundred of Powder, and is surrounded to
the west and south by branches of the river Fale.

This parish hath the adjunct of Penkivell from Penkivell therein,
although I should think it ought rather to have had that of
Fentongollan, since that always, till of late, hath been the principal
place in this parish, and the patronage of it belonged thereto. I
shall therefore in the first place treat of the manor of Fentongollan.

The name of this manor does not bear the meaning assigned to it by Mr.
Carew, but it signifies the holy well. The Saint’s well of the parish
being on the barton. But note that a part of the barton, and the
greater portion of the manor, are in the adjoining parish of Merthyr;
but as the house is wholly in St. Michael Penkevil, this is the most
proper parish wherein to treat of it.

Fentongollan has been the seat of several considerable families; the
first that I meet with as lord of this place is John de Trejago, or
Trejano, Sheriff of Cornwall in the time of Edward the Second, whose
son Stephen Trejago left an only daughter Jane, married to John
Trenoweth, of Trenoweth, in whose posterity it continued, and was
their principal residence till about the middle of the reign of Edward
the Fourth, when John Trenoweth, of this place, left four daughters
and coheiresses.

Philippa, married to John Carminow, who obtained with her this place.

Maud, married to Thomas St. Aubyn, of Clowance.

Catherine, married to John Raynwood, and secondly to Edmund Stradling,
of Dunlery.

Margaret, to John Godolphin, of Godolphin; and between these his large
inheritance was divided.

But this lordship, with many adjacent estates, came entire to
Philippa, his eldest daughter and coheir, the wife of John Carminow,
esq. whose posterity lived here in great splendour, and went by the
name of the great Carminows.

John Carminow, of Fentongollan, was Sheriff of Cornwall in the fifth
year of Henry the Eighth. His son, Thomas Carminow, was a gallant
courtier and gentleman of the privy chamber to the same king; but his
grandson, Oliver Carminow, put a final end to the greatness of his
family, having squandered away a vast estate, no less it is said than
eight thousand pounds a year of actual receipts, leaving two daughters
coheirs to what remained.

Ann, married to William Salter, of Devonshire.

Margaret, to Philip Cole, also of Devonshire, who sold this lordship
to one Mr. Holcomb, in the latter part of Queen Elizabeth’s reign. The
Carminow family was, however, continued through George, younger
brother to Oliver, who lived at Polmawgan, in St. Winnow, as his
posterity did at Trehanick, in St. Teath, where the last male of this
family died, in the reign of King Charles the Second.

Mr. Holcomb sold this place in the reign of James the First to Sir
Nicholas Hals, who resided here. His son John Hals, parted with it to
Ezekiel Grosse, esq. whose daughter carried this, together with
sixteen other manors, to the family of Buller, of Shillingham; and
Francis Buller sold it in King Charles the Second’s reign to Hugh
Boscawen, esq. who pulled down this noble old mansion, the lofty tower
and fine chapel, and carried the stones to build his new house at
Tregothnan, so that not a footstep is to be seen of this once
magnificent place, and a poor farm-house is built for a tenant in its
stead.

Under Fentongollan is a passage or ferry boat to go to Truro, and
likewise to Kea, which is called Mopas; this place was formerly famous
for oysters, which are now spoiled by the vessels that carry off the
copper ore, which vessels, lying generally at this place, and pumping
up the poisonous water from the ore, let in by leakage, have infected
them with a strong brassy taste, so that eating a few of them will
make any one ill; and yet, what is very remarkable, the oysters
themselves grow large and fatten as well as ever.

Adjoining to Fentongollan is Treganyan, which I take to be a
contraction of Tre-gan-ythan, the fursy town on the downs: however,
its present plight may be better. This was anciently the seat of the
family of Sayer.

To the south of Treganyan is the church town and rectory house, and
near to them is Tregothnan, which signifies the old town in the
valley, a name suitable to the situation of the old house, although
not of the new one. This place was anciently the seat of a family of
the same name, till Johanna, the daughter and heir of John Tregothnan,
by her marriage in the 8th year of Edward the Third, 1334, with John
Boscawen, of Boscawen Rose, in the parish of St. Burian, brought
Tregothnan to this family, whose principal seat it hath been ever
since, now just upon four hundred years; who have greatly enriched
themselves, as well as ennobled their blood, since that time, by
marriages with the heiresses of Albalanda, Trenoweth, &c. and by
matching themselves into the most eminent families of the county.

By a bill indented, bearing date the 4th of July 20th of Henry the
Seventh, Thomas Hobbs, clerk, witnesseth to have received for the
king’s use, of Richard Boscawen, esq. five pounds of lawful money, in
full of his fine to be released from the dignity of Knight of the
Bath, at the creation of Prince Henry.

Sir John Arundell, of Trerice, knight, late Sheriff, acknowledges to
have received of Hugh Boscawen, esq. four marks of lawful money of
England to their Majesties’ use, for that he repaired not to the
Queen’s coronation to receive the honour of knighthood, dated January
the 18th, the 1st and 2d of Philip and Mary. This is the gentleman
said in “the Bayliff of Blackmore,” to have been a wise man, learned
in the laws of the realm, who yet was outwitted, or rather cheated, by
a family of Truro, of which he tells a long story.

Hugh Boscawen, esq. was Sheriff of Cornwall the 10th of King Charles
the First, and was grandson to the above Hugh Boscawen, through his
eldest surviving son Nicholas Boscawen and Alice his wife, one of the
daughters and coheirs of John Trevanion, of Trevoster.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals has very naturally been induced to give the history of this
parish, particularly of Fentongollan, and of every one connected with
it, at great length; but he has done this in a manner so diffuse and
incoherent, that the Editor has thought it expedient to omit nearly
the whole, and to substitute a short abridgment made by Mr. Lysons
from Hals and Tonkin, although this will include some repetition from
the latter.


LYSONS.

The manor and barton of Penkevil belonged in the reign of Edward the
First to the family of De Wen, from whom Hals supposes it passed in
marriage to the Penkevils; it is however quite as probable that the
property remained in the same family, they assuming a new name from
the place of their abode. This family, says Hals, flourished for
several descents in a genteel degree, till the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, when Penkevil was given or sold to George Courtenay, gent.
whose great-grandson alienated it to Hender Molesworth, esq. by whom
it was conveyed to Hugh Boscawen, esq.

The manor of Fentongolland, which extends into the parish of Merther,
is said to have belonged at an early period to a family of the same
name, from whom it passed by a succession of female heirs, to the
families of Trejago and Trenoweth. John Trenoweth, who died in 1497,
left four daughters, coheirs. The eldest, Philippa, brought this manor
to John Carminow, of Resprin, (a younger branch of the Carminows, of
Carminow,) who became, in consequence of this match, as Mr. Hals says,
“more famous for his wealth than any other of his name or house, or
than any other family in Cornwall.” Thomas, son of this John Carminow,
was gentleman of the privy chamber to King Henry the Eighth. Hals,
speaking of the hospitality of John Carminow, the grandson, says,
“That he kept open house for all comers and goers, drinkers,
minstrels, dancers, and what not, during Christmas time; and that his
usual allowances of provisions for these twelve days were twelve fat
bullocks, sixty statute bushels of wheat, thirty-six sheep, with hogs,
lambs, and fowls of all sorts, and drink made of wheat and oat malt
proportionable, for at that time barley malt was little known or used
in those parts.”

Oliver Carminow, son of this John, is said to have squandered away the
greater part of his very valuable estates. He left two daughters,
married to Salter and Cole, by whom this manor was sold, in the year
1600, to the Holcombes. Sir Nicholas Hals purchased this estate in
1603, and made Fentongollan his residence; his son sold it to Ezekiel
Grosse, whose daughter and heiress brought this and several other
estates to Francis Buller, Esq. of Shillingham. It was purchased of
that family about the year 1676, by Hugh Boscawen, Esq. who soon
afterwards pulled down the fine old mansion-house of the Carminows,
with its lofty towers and chapel. A farm-house now occupies the site.

Tregothnan, the seat of Lord Viscount Falmouth, came to the Boscawens
in marriage with the heiress of Tregothnan in the fourteenth century.

Treganyan, or Tregonian, formerly the seat of a family bearing the
same name, passed by successive female heirs to the Haleps and Sayers;
by bequest from the latter to Trevelyan; and by a coheiress of
Trevelyan to Rowe. It was purchased of the Rowes by Mr. George
Simmons, who conveyed it to Lord Falmouth. The barton-house is now
occupied by a farmer.

Nancarrow, in this parish, was also the property of a family to whom
it gave its name.

       *     *     *     *     *

The family of Boscawen is unquestionably of very great antiquity, of
Norman or British origin, having either imparted their name to
Boscawen Rose, in St. Burian, or received it from that place.

The peninsula west of the Mount’s Bay, little frequented in former
ages, and scarcely accessible to strangers, abounded, as all similar
districts have been found to do, with long settled possessors of
landed property; who, content with the small fortunes transmitted from
their ancestors, lived on in succession the protectors, the
benefactors, and the paternal governors of their neighbourhoods. Such
were the Boscawens, Vyvyans, Levelas, Trevilians, Noyes, and perhaps
Usticks, Davieses, Kegwins, and some others, all inhabitants for
centuries of this remote portion of Cornwall, and all arranged on
similar scales of property and influence. The Boscawens however
emerged in the fourteenth century, and pursued with great perseverance
and success the only path then leading to advancement in the world.
They married heiress after heiress, and acquired extensive properties
in various parts of the county.

The Boscawens were among the few Cornish gentlemen in the western
division, who took what may now be called the liberal side in the
Civil War, and they continued to oppose the arbitrary principles of
the faction, having at its head the two last brothers of the house of
Stuart――and assisted in the glorious Revolution which secured us from
civil and religious despotism, by placing the Prince of Orange on our
vacant throne.

Hugh Boscawen married Margaret Clinton, eventually coheiress of the
Earl of Lincoln, by whom he had a numerous family, all of whom died
before him, with the exception of Bridget, married to Hugh Fortescue,
ancestor of Earl Fortescue; and with this lady, Mr. Hals states that
Mr. Boscawen gave lands and money to the value of a hundred thousand
pounds; he died in 1701, and was succeeded by his relation of the same
name. This gentleman is understood to have possessed very considerable
talents, and powers of exerting them. He continued ably to support the
Revolution government, and brought to it a powerful aid arising from
the peculiar feature which distinguished Cornwall up to the year 1832.

In 1714, on the German accession, hopes, fears, expectation, and party
violence, burst forth with all the fury that had driven them into
action thirty years before. Vigorous proceedings were therefore
demanded, and may be justified by the exhortation at Salamis, Νυν ὑπερ
παντων Αγων. Yet in moments of cool reflection, and at the distance of
a hundred and twenty years from this agitated period, one cannot
refrain from thinking that Mr. Boscawen was carried beyond the limits
of duty to his country, or zeal for his associates embarked in the
same cause, when he undertook and executed the task of arresting his
countrymen, and probably his former friends, on the suspicion of their
entertaining opinions more favourable than his own to monarchical
power, and to what in modern phrase might perhaps be termed
conservative principles.

Sir Richard Vyvyan was seized at Trelowarren, conveyed by water to
Pendennis Castle, and from thence to the Tower. Mr. Basset, of Tehidy,
would also have been arrested if he had not left his house; and other
proceedings were taken of equal violence.

These acts, however necessary at the time, produced their moral
effects of creating feuds and permanent irritations, so that while the
principal agent was admired by one party, and received the reward of
an hereditary seat in parliament, as was industriously propagated, in
return for these services, the opposite party detested his name, and
usually joined to it an epithet drawn from the inferior apparitors of
the common law.

This gentleman, created Viscount Falmouth in 1720, married Charlotte,
daughter and coheir of Charles Godfrey, Esq. and his wife Charlotte
Churchill, sister of the great Duke of Marlborough. They had a very
numerous family; the eldest son, Hugh Boscawen, succeeded of course to
his father’s estate and hereditary seat in parliament; very little is
remembered about him. He is believed to have been kind and benevolent
in private life, and the Editor is anxious to avail himself of this
opportunity for acknowledging an act of generous and feeling
liberality exercised by this gentleman to the benefit of a near
relation, about fourscore years ago. In ability he probably fell much
below the usual standard of his family, for he is known to have been
cajoled into marrying a kept mistress; and idle tales are circulated
of his mistaking “Optat ephippia Bos” for the Latin of his own name,
and Horace Walpole for the Roman poet. It is probable these mistakes
never literally happened, but such anecdotes are usually
characteristic of the individual; if however they really were made,
the credit of the family has been amply redeemed by a nephew, who has
given to the public one of the best translations of Horace extant in
any language.

Of his various brothers very little also is known or remembered,
excepting of one, and that one is Admiral Boscawen, the glory not of
Cornwall but of his country, the Nelson of his time.

Edward Boscawen went early to sea, expecting (as the Editor has heard
from one to whom he related the circumstances) to be advanced almost
immediately through family interest and connection to the station of a
Lieutenant; when the order was suddenly made for subjecting all
midshipmen to a service of six years at the least. “To this order,” he
was accustomed to say, “I owe all my knowledge of seamanship, and to
this order the British Fleet is mainly indebted for the superior
knowledge and skill of its officers.”

The young man was properly advanced as occasions offered themselves;
and from the period of his commanding a ship, his whole career was one
of glory and of deserved success. Besides engagements with single
ships, and their capture, his achievements are recorded at Porto
Bello, Carthagena, Cape Finisterre, the East Indies, the Coast of
Spain, and above all at Louisbourgh Harbour, in Cape Breton, where he
effected a conquest most gallant in itself, and essential to the
subjugation of Canada by General Wolfe; and what may equal the spolia
opima of Rome, he three times made M. Hoquart, the French commander, a
prisoner in the course of one war.

Admiral Boscawen was beloved throughout the navy for his care and
attention to the health, the comfort, and the happiness of every one
under his command, to as high a degree as he was admired for skill,
for prudence, and for valour; throughout Cornwall he was adored. So
that, notwithstanding the rule observed in that county, of considering
every gentleman who obtains a seat in the Upper House of Parliament,
as relinquishing for himself of course, and also for his family, in
favour of other gentlemen, all claim to the county representation,
Admiral Boscawen, standing completely on his own personal merits, and
founding a new branch from an ancient family, was invited to accept
the situation of member for Cornwall. The general election arising
from the accession of George the Third was approaching, when a fever
closed the life of this great man, on the 10th of January 1761, in the
50th year of his age.

Admiral Boscawen married Frances, daughter of William Evelyn
Glanville, a lady possessed of every quality that could adorn the
highest station, or that could render her amiable in domestic life.

They had several children:

The eldest, called after his father’s name, died at Spa in Germany, in
early life, on the 17th of July 1774.

The second son, William Glanville Boscawen, having engaged in the sea
service, anxious to emulate the splendid example given by his father,
and having become a Lieutenant, was most unfortunately drowned in
Jamaica, on the 21st of April 1769. On this melancholy occasion the
following elegy was composed by Doctor John Walcot.

This gentleman was bred to the medical profession under an uncle at
Fowey, where he afterwards practised, but standing high in the
estimation of Sir William Trelawny, appointed Governor of Jamaica,
Doctor Walcot, provided with a medical degree, went out with him as
his physician; and in times when propriety and decorum were less
attended to than at present, he was also admitted into holy orders,
and thus became qualified for holding a living in the Island, one of
which he actually obtained; but having returned to England after the
Governor’s decease, he relinquished the preferment, which could not be
held without residence, and abandoned the character of a clergyman.

No one can read this poem, somewhat perhaps too nearly resembling an
ode of Collins, nor many other of his more elegant productions, his
sonnets set to music by Jackson, &c. without regretting the change of
style and of subject which he afterwards adopted under the assumed
name ―――― Pindar.

  Along the twilight vale I rove
    My sorrows o’er the youth to shed,
  Where Honour wraps the silent grave,
    That darkling seems to mourn the dead.

  And oh! tho’ far from thee I stray,
    Remembrance oft shall haunt the gloom,
  Her tear bedew thy lonely clay,
    Her hand with roses strew thy tomb.

  On Fancy’s ear shall swell the sigh
    By blooming virgins breath’d in vain,
  On Fancy’s ear the knell shall die,
    That sadden’d all the weeping plain.

  Tho’ forced from thee I wander far,
    Thy fate shall cloud my rising Morn;
  And oft with Evening’s silent star
    I’ll hover o’er thy distant urn.

  And when to Melancholy’s sigh
    The Muse her sorrowing voice shall join,
  Thy hapless fate shall fill her eye,
    And melt with woe the tender line.

  And oft shall memory impart
    The smile that shone on Albion’s brow,
  When kindling in thy youthful heart
    She saw the beams of valour glow.

  How few the sighs of Virtue mourn;
    How few, alas! the friends she knows;
  But here she comes, a pilgrim lorn,
    To bid thy gentle ghost repose.

  With sculpture let the marble groan,
    Let Flattery mock the lifeless ear;
  How nobler far the nameless stone
    Bedew’d by Pity’s generous tear.

Mr. George Evelyn Boscawen, third son of the Admiral, succeeded his
uncle as third Viscount Falmouth in July 1782, and married two years
afterwards Elizabeth Anne, daughter of John Crewe, esq. Their eldest
son, Edward Boscawen, advanced to the dignity of an Earl, married in
August 1810, Ann Frances, daughter of Henry Bankes, esq. repeatedly
member for Corfe Castle, and for the county of Dorset; they have an
only son, who with the double portion of honour that invests young men
who apply themselves to learning or science, without the ordinary
stimuli of pecuniary benefit, or of advancement in the world, obtained
the high distinction at Oxford in 1832 of being included in the first
class of literary merit.

Tregothnan, from its bold and elevated situation, commanding an
extensive view, intersected by various branches of the Falmouth river,
and of the harbour, from the abundance of its trees and woods, and
from the integrity of its surrounding property fenced in by natural
boundaries, must be considered as the first gentleman’s seat in
Cornwall, with the exception perhaps of Mount Edgcumbe. The house
standing there till within these few years, bore the appearance of
considerable antiquity, and harmonized with the surrounding scenery;
the ruins of Fentongollan could not have been used for building this
house, as Mr. Hals relates: they may have supplied materials for
repair, or for additional offices.

The present proprietor has taken down the old house, and replaced it
by a new one, that may compete with the best in England for real
utility, and for decorations harmonizing with its bold situation and
surrounding landscape.

The old parish church, and its massive tower, supported by immense
buttresses, form altogether a venerable and impressive group, visible
for a great distance in almost every direction. The advowson of the
living was acquired with Fentongollan.

  This parish measures 961 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815:           847    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            84    3    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    154   |    178   |     167    |    179
    giving an increase of 16 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Granville Leveson Gower, presented in 1818
    by the Earl of Falmouth.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is entirely situated in the calcareous series, and
consists of the same rocks as Lamoran, and the eastern part of the
parish of Kea.




MICHAELSTOW.


HALS.

St. Michaelstow rectory is situate in the hundred of Lesnewith, and
hath upon the north Lantegles by Camelford, south Brewer, west St.
Udye, east Advent. For the name of this parish, it is taken from the
church dedicated to St. Michael the Archangel.

At the time of the Norman Conquest this district was rated under the
jurisdiction either of Lantegles or St. Vaye. In the Inquisition of
the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, into the value of Cornish
Benefices, 1294, it was rated by the name of Ecclesia de Sancto
Michaelstow, 40_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, £10. 13_s._ 8_d._;
and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, temp.
William III. £72.

In this parish formerly lived the genteel family of Michaelstow, that
married one of the heirs of Gifford, of Fewborough in Devon, and had
issue by her a daughter named Mary, married to Wollacomb, of Devon,
temp. Henry VI. (Prince’s Worthies of Devon, in Wollacomb).


TONKIN.

This parish, named Michaelstow, which signifies Michael’s Place, is a
rectory. The patronage in the Crown: the incumbent Cloak.


THE EDITOR.

There is little deserving of remark in this parish, except some
doubtful remains of military antiquities. Mr. Lysons says, that the
great duchy manor of Helston in Trig, extends over the greater part of
this parish, and that what was formerly called Helsbury Park, is
possessed by the Duke of Bedford, under a lease; and that just without
the former boundary of the park are extensive earthworks, which Mr.
Lysons conjectures to be the spot described as a castle by William of
Worcester, and probably of great antiquity. The church has a few
monuments to the Lowers and others. The only village in this parish,
in addition to the church town, is called Treveighan.

Trevenin was a seat of some branch of the Lower family, now all
extinct; and Tregone, heretofore belonging to the Mayows, is now the
property of Mr. Hockin.

The advowson is in the Duke of Cornwall. Mr. Tonkin says in the Crown;
but much confusion seems to have existed in former times between the
claims of these two corporations sole, and if such a subject were
worthy of investigation, it is probable that many inaccuracies might
still be discovered.

The present Rector is the Rev. Edward Spettigue, presented in 1818 by
the King as Prince of Wales.

  Michaelstow measures 1,338 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1564    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           141   11    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    158   |    181   |     216    |    215
    giving an increase of 36 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish skirts the northern boundary of the granite of St.
Breward, reposing on rocks belonging to the porphyritic series, the
most interesting of which is a kind of micaceous schist, that occurs
near the granite, and may be traced through the parishes of St.
Breward and Blisland, and Cardenham.




MYLOR, OR MILOR.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Mylor lieth in the hundred of Kerrier; it has to the west Gluvias, to
the north St. Perran Arworthal, with Carnan and Restronget creeks, to
the east and south Mylor Pool and Falmouth harbour.

The Saint that gives name to this parish is Meliorus, son of Melianus,
Duke of Cornwall.

In the valuation by the Bishop of Lincoln this parish is valued at £6.
13_s._ 4_d._; being about that time appropriated to the College of
Glasseney.

The church is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Books at £16. 15_s._.
The patronage in the Bishop of Exeter; the incumbent Mr. Francis St.
Barbe; the impropriation of the sheaf in Robert Trefusis, esq.

I shall begin with the barton of Carclew. I find the name of this
place anciently written Crucglew. Cruc is a barrow, and also clew I
apprehend to be an inclosure; so that the whole signifies the
inclosure of barrows, or by barrows, of which there are several in the
adjoining commons. The first owner of this place that I can meet with
is Dangeros, or Dangers, who married Margery, the daughter of
Bartholomew Serischall, whose arms were the same with the Seriseaux:
Argent, a saltire Sable, between twelve cherries slipped Proper; in
the reign I believe of Henry the Second.

Robert de Cardinan, by a very ancient deed, without date, which I have
seen, gave Crucgleu and Pengaer to Richard Dangeros and his heirs.

This family, who by their matches seem to have been gentlemen of
considerable note, continued at this place till the beginning of the
reign of Henry the Fourth, when James Dangero left two daughters and
coheirs:

Margaret, married to David Renaudin, of Arwothal; and Isabella,
married to Richard Bonithon, second son of Simon Bonithon, of
Bonithon.

This barton fell to the share of the said David Renaudin, but he and
Margaret his wife dying without issue, their portion of the whole
inheritance, said to be worth £500 per annum, came to Richard Bonithon
and Isabella his wife. The last male descendant of this family,
Richard Bonithon, esq. a very worthy gentleman, died July the 31st
1697, in the 45th year of his age, leaving by Honor his wife, daughter
of Sir Thomas Heale, of Fleet, one daughter and heir, Jane, married to
Samuel Kempe, of Penryn, esq.; which said Samuel Kempe died without
issue, October the 20th 1728, leaving the said barton of Carclew, and
some small part of the ancient lands, (for he had sold off the rest in
his lifetime,) to his widow, who now resideth there; a lady who, for
her many virtues, bounty, and other accomplishments, deserveth a much
better fortune, in every respect, than she has had the luck to meet
with.

The said Mr. Kempe built a noble house here, which he did not live to
finish, and had laid such a plan for avenues, gardens, &c. as when
brought to perfection would have made it one of the pleasantest seats
in the county.

There hath been much tin on this barton, and perhaps it would turn to
good account if a deep adit were brought in to unwater the shafts in
depth. There is also a pretty good lode of antimony not wrought, and
perhaps not worth working.

The arms of D’Angers, or Dangeros, as they were painted in the old
glass windows at Carclew, were Sable, a chevron between three
flowers-de-luce Argent.

Arms of Bonython: Argent, a chevron between three flowers-de-luce
Sable. But they likewise gave them, as appear in the old hall, as
above, with three pelicans feeding their young ones in the nests,
Argent, added.


THE MANOR OF RESTRONGET.

This manor joins with Carclew. It was formerly written Restrongas, and
I take the sense of the word to be Res, Ros, Rose, a valley; trong, a
nose, used in the same sense as we use ness, from the French, for land
jutting into the sea; and gas, or guys, deep; so as to signify
altogether, the valley with the deep promontory or point of land.
William de Bodrigan was lord of this manor in the 12th of Henry the
Fourth. And that family possessed it till the beginning of the reign
of Henry the Seventh, when, on the attainder of Bodrigan, it was given
to William Trevanion, in which family it still continues, John
Trevanion, of Carhayes, Esq. being the present lord thereof. In the
village of Restronget have lived in lease for several generations a
younger branch of the Leys of Ponacumb.

There is a passing boat kept here, it being the post road, and by much
the nearest cut from Falmouth to Truro and the east, called Restronget
Passage.

A part of the Bishop’s manor of Penryn extends into this parish.


MANOR OF TREFUSIS AND TREGOSE.

Trefusis, saith the Editor of Camden, in the Additional Part, p. 22,
signifies a walled town, or fortified place. This hath been the seat
of an eminent family of the same name ever since the Conquest, if not
before. The present possessor hereof is Robert Trefusis, Esq. a young
gentleman of great hopes, who is yet unmarried. These gentlemen, led
away by a false notion, (with many others) of being of French
extraction, have given, in allusion to the supposed meaning of their
name in the language of that country, for their arms, Argent, a
chevron between three fusees, or wharrow spindles, Sable.

The house is extremely pleasant by its situation, and would be much
more so were it built a little higher up. To the south of the house is
a fine grove, and a walk, at the end of which is a pleasure-house,
built by this gentleman’s father, from whence there is a very
beautiful prospect.

Adjoining to Trefusis is Nankersy, that is the winding valley, from
ceirsie, to twist or wind about. This place, by a lease from the
Trefusises, has been for two or three generations the seat of a
younger branch of the Littletons, of Lanhidrock; the late owner,
William Littleton, Gent. died a bachelor in the year 1734, and by his
decease the estate is fallen into the lord’s hands. The arms of
Littleton are Argent, a chevron between three escallops Sable.

On this Nankersy hath been lately built by the Dutchmen a considerable
town, called by them Flushing, after a town of the same name in
Zealand, by which name it is now generally known. And had these
Dutchmen had the continuing of this town, they would have made it in
some measure to resemble its namesake, by digging a canal to discharge
all sorts of merchandise through the middle of it, there being a large
marsh adjoining, that seemed by nature to have been placed for that
purpose; but as it is, though there are some good houses here, the
whole is without any order, contrivance, or regularity. The late
Samuel Trefusis, Esq. was at no small expense in levelling the place,
the buildings, quays, &c. for loading or unloading the vessels; and
could he have settled the packet boats here, for which it lies far
better than Falmouth, the water being deeper, and they all lying
before it, Flushing would soon have been a place of great resort; but,
having failed in that, the town is now falling to decay, and many of
the houses of which it consists are uninhabited.


THE MANOR OF MYLOR.

A small lordship which takes its name from the parish, and in which
the church is situated, so that probably the churchyard and the glebe
were taken out of it by the gift of some former proprietor, although
the fact is now forgotten. The present lord of this manor is Martin
Lister Killigrew, Esq. an adopted heir to Sir Peter Killigrew.

The church is situated at the south-east end of the parish, near that
branch of Falmouth haven called Mylor pool. It is but a small
building, consisting of a nave, one aisle of the same length, with a
handsome north cross aisle, belonging to Carclew; and a little
distance from the west is a low square campanile covered with slate,
in which are three bells.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Tonkin seems to have fallen into an error respecting the valuation
of this living in the taxation of Pope Nicholas; which he says was £6.
8_s._ 4_d._ But no name in the least degree resembling Milor, can be
found under Kerrier hundred in the parliamentary publication of that
record, nor is any parish rated at that sum.

The church contains several monuments. The most interesting is one of
marble, placed there to the memory of her father, mother, and husband,
by Jane, the heiress of the Bonithon family, and widow of Samuel
Kempe, who built the house at Carclew, and died on the 20th of October
1728, in the 59th year of his age.

There is also a monument to Francis Trefusis, who died in 1680,
decorated by handsome sculpture. And one to the memory of Edward
Baynton Yescombe, esq. who fell while he was bravely defending the
King George, Lisbon packet, against the enemy, in August 1803. And
another executed by the celebrated artist Mr. Westmacott, to the
memory of Reginald Cocks, youngest son of Charles Cocks, Lord Somers,
and Anne his wife, sister of the late Mr. Reginald Pole Carew.

Carclew was devised by Jane Kempe to her relation Mr. James Bonithon,
of Grampound, from whom it was purchased by Mr. Lemon in 1749, who
immediately began to finish the house, and to complete the whole as a
family residence on the scale appropriate to every thing that he
undertook. Here Mrs. Lemon resided after she became a widow, and here
the family have resided ever since. Mr. and Mrs. Lemon had an only son
William Lemon, who married Anne, daughter of Mr. John Willyams, of
Carnanton. Both died in early life, leaving three children.

William, born Oct. 6, 1748, who succeeded his grandfather in 1760,
married Jane, daughter of James Buller, of Morvall, esq. was elected
member of Penryn, on the decease of Mr. Francis Basset in 1769, and at
the general election of 1774 succeeded in a contest to represent the
county, which, universally esteemed and respected, he continued to do
by ten subsequent unanimous elections, during a period of fifty years,
up to his decease on the 11th of December 1824. This gentleman was
created a Baronet, and commanded for several years the county militia.

John, the second son, became a colonel in the army, commanded the
militia of Cornish Miners, served in parliament for the borough of
Saltash, and four times for Truro. He died unmarried in 1814, at
Polvellan, a place that he had created with great taste on the
southern side of the lake, loch, or loo, formed by the two rivers
above East and West Looe, and close on the margin of a large salt
water pond, made to retain the sea water at high tide, afterwards to
give motion to the machinery of grist mills, from whence Mr. Lemon
named his new place Pol-Vellan, in Cornish the mill-pool.

Colonel Lemon was such a proficient in music as to perform
extemporaneous voluntaries; and several psalm tunes and chants of his
composition have been printed.

Anna Lemon, the sister, married Mr. John Buller, of Morval.

Sir William Lemon greatly improved Carclew, and added most materially
to the extent of the property round his seat, by purchasing from Mr.
Trefusis the manor of Restronget, which had been acquired some years
before from Mr. Trevanion.

He is most worthily succeeded by his son Sir Charles Lemon, now member
for the county, to whom the house at Carclew is indebted for still
further improvements made in the best taste; the grounds and gardens
have also been enlarged and beautified, and further arrangements and
other decorations are still in progress. It is a very curious
circumstance that several acres of ground at Carclew have been
recently found covered with the _eria ciliaris_, not known before as
an English plant.

Of his eight sisters three have married Cornish gentlemen. Harriet,
married to the late Lord de Dunstanville. Caroline, to John Heale
Tremayne, esq. late member for the county. Jane, to her double
cousin-german Mr. Anthony Buller, Barrister-at-law, and knighted on
his going to India as a judge.

The family of Trefusis can now scarcely be considered as connected
with Cornwall, Robert George William Trefusis having succeeded, on the
death of George Walpole, Earl of Orford, to the barony in fee of
Clinton, created by writ of summons in the year 1299, the 28th of
Edward the First, and under a deed of settlement, made by the same
Lord Orford, having succeeded also to a very large estate, chiefly in
Devonshire; and finally, in consequence of their having alienated by
far the greater part of their possessions in this county.

This gentleman having married Marianne Gaulis, a lady of Switzerland,
and died in 1797, has been succeeded by his son Robert Cotton St. John
Trefusis. He married one of the daughters of William Stephen Poyntz,
Esq. and niece of Mark Anthony Browne, last Lord Montague, of Cowdray
Castle, in Sussex; but having died without issue, he is succeeded by
his brother Charles Trefusis. The widow is recently married again to
Colonel Horace Seymour.

The situation of Trefusis is very beautiful, the whole jutting into
Falmouth harbour, with Penryn river on the south and Milor river to
the north.

Mr. Tonkin has given a picture of Flushing, very far from
corresponding with its present features: instead of falling into decay
it has grown up to be an elegant town, although the packet station has
not been fixed there, nor is it in all probability suited to that
purpose.

If the word Gas, or Guys, which Mr. Tonkin says means deep in Cornish,
should also, as in some other languages, bear the correlative sense of
lofty, his explanation of Restronget would be more complete.

Present Vicar, the Rev. Edward Hoblyn, collated in 1823 by the Bishop
of Exeter.

  This parish measures 3,463 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           6724    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           951   12    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {   1665   |   1897   |    2193    |   2647
    giving an increase of 59 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The eastern part of Milor appears to belong to the calcareous series,
but the rocks of the western part correspond with those of Gluvias.




MINSTER.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Minster, a rectory in the hundred of Lesnewith, is bounded to the west
by Trevelga, to the north by Farrabury, to the east by St. Juliot, and
to the south by the parish of Lesnewith.

In the taxation of Pope Nicholas this parish is named Talkarn, and is
valued at £5. In Wolsey’s valuation it is taken at £22. 17_s._ 10_d._
The patronage in Edward Amy, Esq.; the incumbent Mr. James Amy his
brother.


THE EDITOR.

Near the church are some ruins still to be seen of a monastic
establishment, said by Mr. Lysons, on the authority of Doctor William
Borlase’s manuscript collections, to have been a priory of Black Monks
called Minster, or Tolcarne, founded by William de Botreaux, as a cell
to Tywardreth, itself subject to the abbey of St. Sergius and Bacchus,
in Angiers. Tywardreth, however, after having been seized into the
King’s hands, as an alien priory, was made independent and denizen,
and continued till the general dissolution by Henry the Eighth.
Probably therefore Minster remained as a parcel of Tywardreth up to
the same eventful period.

Tanner, however, calls it merely an alien priory to the abbey of St.
Sergius and Bacchus at Angiers, without any notice of Tywardreth.

In Dugdale’s Monasticon is the following addition to Tanner: Minster
Prior, alienigena habet in proprios usus Ecclesias de Minster et
Bodecastell; and in a note there is a reference to muniments in Exeter
Cathedral, and to MS. collections in the British Museum, vol. XL. p.
39, for a resignation of this priory by the abbot and convent de
Valle, or Vale Royal, in Cheshire; from which it would seem that this
house was not restored to Tywardreth after the sequestration of both.

The manor of Pollifont, in Lewannick, (see that parish) which formerly
belonged to this priory, is now an appendage to the living, so that
the rector of Minster is lord of the manor of Pollifont; and the
customs of the manor are said to be, that on the accession of a new
rector, after the decease of the former, but not otherwise, the
tenants pay him thirty pounds and one penny, raised according to some
ancient schedule among themselves.

Several small fees are due on surrenders and on admissions at the
manor courts, and on the death of each tenant a heriot becomes due to
the lord, which is either his best beast or six guineas, and in
addition to these, there is an annual payment of four pounds.

Minster church lies in a deep valley, surrounded by trees, giving the
strongest impression of its forming the quire of a sequestered
monastery. It contains several monuments to the Henders, Cottons, &c.
One has a Latin inscription, with the curious pedantic device of
certain letters standing prominent among others in the different
words, and indicating, as Roman numerals, the various dates. Four
lines on William Cotton, son of William Cotton who held the see of
Exeter from 1598 to 1621, and on Elizabeth his wife, daughter and
coheir of John Hender, have been frequently transcribed, on account of
their extreme simplicity:

  Forty-nine years they lived man and wife,
  And what’s more rare, thus many without strife,
  She first departing, he a few weeks tried
  To live without her, could not――and so died.

This church is one of the very few in Cornwall that want the
decoration of a tower, and strange legends are circulated to account
for this defect, probably of a more ancient date than the Reformation.
The bells are said to have arrived in a vessel almost to the spot
where they would have been landed, when an expression of the captain,
implying confidence in the powers which God had given him, construed
into blasphemy by Anthopomophites of all religions, is supposed to
have caused the immediate destruction of the ship, with every one on
board; but when the ground seas roll with their accustomed violence on
this iron-bound coast, the bells are still fancied not only to ring a
peal, but to indicate by particular sounds the cause of this reputed
miracle, intended to convince mankind that they are bound to neglect
and to render vain whatever gifts the Almighty may have bestowed on
them, and thanklessly to employ their time in imploring more.

This place was in feudal times the residence of a baronial family,
bearing the name of Botreaux, which they imparted to a manor, or, as
the Court Rolls would testify, to an honor, having manors dependent,
and enclosing the town of Botreaux Castle, dignified by the
appellation of a borough; a term, it may be observed, that had not in
ancient times any reference to the privilege of sending members to
parliament.

Mr. Lysons says, that William Lord Botreaux, the last of this family,
fell in the second battle of St. Alban’s, leaving an only daughter,
married to Sir Robert Hungerford.

The honour of Botreaux, and the manor of Worthyvale, went with the
heiress of Hungerford to the family of Hastings, by whom this property
was sold to John Hender, esq. in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

John Hender appears to have had four daughters and coheiresses:
Katharine, married to John Molesworth; Frances, to Richard Robarts, of
Truro; Mary, to Ellis Heale, of Devonshire; and Elizabeth, to William
Cotton, son of the Bishop; Boscastle and Worthyvale came as a portion
to the last.

Sir John Cotton, probably the grandson of William Cotton, resided
here, and died in 1703, without a family; he gave the property to his
sister’s son, Mr. Amy, Sheriff of Cornwall in the year 1714, whose
father had the living of Minster. His son, Cotton Amy, esq. married
one of the two daughters and coheiresses of Samuel Gilbert, of
Tackbear, in Bridgerule, and had two daughters: Grace, married to Mr.
Jonathan Phillipps, of Camelford, a Captain in the Cornwall Militia.
This lady had several children, who all died at early ages; and her
sister never married, having continued in a state of derangement at
Botreaux Castle for many years.

Sir Jonathan Phillipps (for he had been knighted on the occasion of
presenting an address from Camelford, when a female offering a
petition to King George the Third, was observed to have a knife in her
hand,) left his share of this property, with the remainder of his own
estate, to Mr. Thomas Winslow, the son of his sister, on his taking
the name of Phillipps, which he did, and was succeeded by his son, who
now resides at Landue, in Lezant, but having purchased that place and
lands about it, Mr. Phillipps has parted with much of the estate at
Botreaux Castle to Mr. Avery, a gentleman who carries on a very
considerable trade there, and seems likely to raise the place into
greater opulence and importance than it can have experienced since the
fall of its feudal grandeur.

An elevated piece of ground, rendered steep by artificial scarping, is
pointed out as the site of the castle, which gave a termination to the
honour of Botreaux. This castle had, however, disappeared before the
time of Carew; and the dwelling of Sir John Cotton, probably
constructed after the castle had become a ruin, which used to be
called _The Great House_, was scarcely habitable fifty years ago, and
has now disappeared.

The port of Botreaux Castle admits coasting vessels in fine weather,
and considerable trade is carried on there by exporting the excellent
slatestone with which that neighbourhood abounds, and by importing
coal and lime, in addition to such articles of commerce as the
adjacent country may require.

It is generally believed that the harbour might be rendered safe and
commodious for a sum much within the limits of private expenditure.
Ponderous articles might be raised to any required level by the power
of water wheels, and from the summit of the acclivity, a flat plain
extends to the distance of many miles inland; so that a possibility at
the least seems to exist, of Botreaux Castle becoming the site of an
extensive commerce.

The advowson of the living belongs jointly to Mr. Thomas John
Phillipps, representative through his great uncle of Miss Grace Amy,
and the representatives of her sister. The late incumbent was the Rev.
R. Winsloe, uncle to Mr. Phillipps.

The manor of Worthyvale was sold to Mr. Hugh Boscawen in the early
part of the last century, and was used as a hunting seat; it has again
been sold by one of his descendants, and it belonged some years since
to a gentleman of the name of Farnham.

The single stone laid over a stream, having some letters cut on its
lower surface, and which is believed to have marked the exact spot
where Arthur received his death wound, is nearly in front of the house
at Worthyvale.

  This parish measures 2838 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815       2089    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                       253   19    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    311   |    396   |     425    |    497
    giving an increase of 25½ per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Charles Woolcombe, presented in 1825 by the
    Rev. R. Winsloe.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The geological structure of this parish is similar to that of
Lesnewith, except that at its northern extremity it contains pyritous
and carbonaceous rocks like those of Farrabury.




ST. MINVER, OR ST. MYNFER.


HALS.

Minver, or St. Mynfer, vicarage, is situate in the hundred of Trigg,
and hath upon the north and west the Irish sea cliff and Padstow
harbour, south Egleshayle, east St. Endellyan.

In the Domesday Book this parish was taxed by the name of Ros-minver.
In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, into the
value of Cornish benifices, 1294, Ecclesia de Mynfred, or Mynfer, in
decanatu de Minor Trigshire, was rated £7, vicar ejusdem 20_s._ In
Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, £13. 10_s._ 1_d._ The patronage, formerly
in the Prior of Bodmin, who endowed it, now Prideaux, of Netherton;
the incumbent Lewellen; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound
Land Tax, 1696, temp. William III. £385. 13_s._

At Trevill-va, alias Trevellva, there is yet extant an ancient free
chapel for divine service, kept in good repair by the lord of this
place, furnished with an old English Bible, heretofore made use of in
this chapel.

This barton is the dwelling of William Silly, Esq. commissioner for
the peace temp. James II. and one of his corporation regulators. He
married Kekewich, of Trehawke; and had issue Hender Silly, his son and
heir, that died without issue; after her death he married Honour, one
of the coheirs of Carter, and hath issue by her also; his father
married Cotton (sister to Sir John Cotton, of Botreaux Castle). His
grandfather, John Silly, gent. attorney-at-law, of St. Wenn, married
Marks, of that place, where he got a great estate by the inferior
practice of the law, and altered his name and arms from Ceely to
Silly, for what reason I know not; in testimony whereof he and his
posterity ever since gave the arms of Ceely, viz. in a field Azure, a
chevron between three mullets Or.

King James the Second’s regulators of corporations in Cornwall, were
Humphrey Borlase, esq. of Treludrow, Sheriff, William Silly, esq.
aforesaid, William Cood, of Pensiple, esq. Mr. Edward Vincent, of
Truro, and Edward Noseworthy, esq.

Here Mr. Hals’ manuscript is deficient, and several subsequent
parishes are lost.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has merely copied a few of the introductory sentences from
Mr. Hals.


THE EDITOR.

The great tithes of this parish, and the presentation to the vicarage,
were parts of the possessions belonging to the priory of Bodmin at the
dissolution.

In the taxation of Pope Nicholas the rectory and vicarage are assessed:

  Ecclesia Sancte Minfrede Rec.   £7  0  0
              Vicar ejusdem        1  0  0

In the returns made to First Fruits officers for King Henry the
Eighth, of the Ecclesiastical and temporal property belonging to this
house, is this entry:

  Mynfrey     Decimæ Garbæ      £14  13  6

The manor of Bodmin was bestowed by the King on the well-known poet
Mr. Thomas Sternhold, for his translation of The Psalms, which may
fairly be considered as a very adequate reward; but almost all the
ecclesiastical possessions were given to the Prideauxes, and were
finally sold about fifty years ago, soon after the decease of the last
representative of the Devonshire branch of that family. Both the
appropriated rectory and the vicarage were purchased by the Rev.
William Sandys.

Mr. Sandys distinguished himself at Oxford, and was in consequence
elected a Fellow of All Souls. He travelled through the south of
Europe with Mr. Francis Basset, afterwards Lord de Dunstanville, and
held the living of Illogan till Mr. John Basset, a younger brother,
received priest’s orders. He married Miss Mary Praed, of Trevethow;
and dying in 1816, he left the larger part of a handsome fortune to
Mr. William Warren, a sister’s son, who married Miss Marshall, another
sister’s daughter, and their son having taken the name of Sandys, is
now the possessor, and resides at St. Minver.

A presentation to the vicarage was given by Mr. Sandys to the Rev.
George Treweeke, the son of a third sister, who has also the rectory
of Illogan.

Mr. Sandys, in consequence of some incident or of some allusion now
forgotten, but not in diminution of the respect most justly due to his
talents and his learning, acquired the appellation of Cardinal,
perhaps from his having worn a scarlet dress at Rome, on some public
occasion.

A monument is placed in the church to Mrs. Sandys, with the following
inscription:

  M. S.
  Mariæ fil: sec: H. M. Praed de Trevethow in hoc Agro,
  et Gul. Sandys, A.M. olim Col: Om: Anim: Oxon: Soc.
  Deinde hujus Parochiæ Vicarii
  Uxoris dilectissimæ.
  Quæ ob. 4^{to} die mens: Aprilis A.D. MDCCCIX ætatis LX.
  Amoris ergo et desiderii
  Maritus superstes heu! et mœrens
  H. M. P. C.

Mr. Lysons says that the manor of Penmear was given by the Black
Prince to Sir William Woodland, usher of his chamber, but that it
reverted again to the Duchy.

Trevernon, or Trewornan, belonged in the reign of king James the
First, to Thomas Clifford, D.D. It afterwards became the seat of the
Howes; from whom it passed, with an heiress, to the Darells. It is now
the residence of the Rev. Darell Stephens, their representative.

There is a monument to Thomas Darell, esq. who died in 1691.

Pentire Point in this parish is the boldest promontory on the southern
side of the Bristol Channel. The barton of which this headland forms a
part, belonged to a family of the same name, till it passed with an
heiress to Roscarrock, and from them by an heiress to Tremayne; and it
belongs at present to John Hearle Tremayne, esq. of Heligon.

Trevelver, once a seat of the Arundells, belongs now to the family of
Yeo.

This parish is divided on the eastern side from St. Kew, by an estuary
dangerous to passengers, and where lives were not unfrequently lost,
till Mr. Sandys took the lead in constructing a bridge across the
ford, which he effected after much exertion, and at a considerable
expense to himself.

Although St. Minver is strictly one entire parish, yet there are two
ancient chapels still remaining with districts assigned to them, out
of which some of the parish officers are annually chosen.

The parish church, with its more appropriate division, is called
Highlands, and the remaining part annexed in some degree to the
chapels, is called Lowlands, subdivided into north and south. One of
the chapels, according to Mr. Lysons, is dedicated to St. Michael;
which, if the fact is so, must be a very unusual circumstance, as the
wings of the archangel appear to have associated his habits, in
popular opinion, with those of birds, which led him to delight in
elevated situations; the other chapel has for its patron St. Enodoc or
St. Gwinnodock.

One of these chapels happening to require repair about the middle of
the last century, the vestry or the parish officers sold the bells to
reimburse the expense, notwithstanding their being tenfold consecrated
by the inscription:


ALFREDUS REX.

It is perhaps too much to assume that they were given by the Great
Alfred, although his visits to St. Neot must have brought that most
illustrious of our kings into this neighbourhood.

The baptising of bells, and their dedication, have so much prevailed,
that these were in all probability cast long since the time of Alfred;
but his name should have been their protection, if other protection
were wanted than their consecrated use.

The following monkish lines not unfrequently appear on bells made
prior to the reformation:

     Laudo Deum verum――Populum voco――Congrego clerum
     Defunctos ploro――Fugo fulmina:――Festa decoro.

Great Tom of Oxford, (called Thomas Clusius) while it remained at
Oseney Abbey, and before it was re-cast for its present station in
1670, had this curious legend:

      In Thomæ laude resono BIM BOM sine fraude.
    It weighs 17,000 lbs.

  St. Minver measures 6604 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          8,354    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           834   17    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    788   |    851   |    1028    |   1110
    giving an increase of 41 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. George Treweeke, also Rector of Illogan,
    presented by William Sandys, esq. in 1817.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The part of this parish which lies parallel with Endellion, resembles
it in geological composition; but one part of it extends further
north, and contains a compact rock of the same nature as that of
Trevose Head in St. Merryn.




MORVA.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Morva is situated in the hundred of Penwith, and is bounded to the
west by St. Just, to the north by the sea, to the east by Zennor, to
the south by Sancred and Maddern. It is a daughter church to Madderne,
the vicar of which performs divine service, and preacheth in the
morning on the first Sunday in every month. The said vicar hath the
small tithes.

Morva signifies Locus Maritimus, a place near the sea, as this parish
is. The name is sometimes written Morveth, implying much the same
sense.

The chief place, and almost the only one of note in this little
parish, is Tregamynyon, that is, the stony dwelling, which was for
several generations in the family of Lanyon, and the residence of a
younger branch thereof ever since the 30th of Queen Elizabeth; for in
Trinity term the 31st year of her reign was a fine passed at
Westminster between William Lanyon, gent. and Richard Lanyon, esq. and
John Lanyon, gent. of three messuages, ten acres of meadow, sixty
acres of pasture, one hundred and fifty acres of furze, one
water-mill, &c. in Tregamynyon. Here his posterity flourished in good
repute till the reign of Queen Anne, when John Lanyon, of this place,
gent. and John Lanyon, jun. his son and heir, joined in the sale of
this estate to John Borlase, of Pendeen, esq. who is the present
possessor thereof. The said John Lanyon, jun. married to his wife
Frances Brydges, sister to James Lord Chandos, and aunt to the Duke of
that name, who is since dead without issue, being well stricken in
years when he married, and twice a widower before. John Lanyon, the
father, married ―――― Borlase, of Pendeen. His grandfather was commonly
called the Golden Lanyon, as having gotten great riches by tin, which
he divided among his numerous issue; but before I quit this place I
must relate for the benefit of my readers what Mr. Lanyon, sen. told
me respecting the covering of his house, as it may be of great use to
persons building in high and exposed places. That not being able to
keep his house here in good repair, it being rifled and uncovered by
every storm, he at last resolved to plaster it with lime and hair on
the lathes within, where the stones are fastened; after which he had
not the least stripping of his healing for thirty years. This same
thing was tried with the same success by Mr. Hector Trelevant, of St.
Agnes; and it is, I verily believe, a certain and cheap prevention of
damage.


THE MANOR OF CARVOLGHE, OR CORVAEGHE.

This manor was one of those forfeited by Francis Tregian, esq. (See
Probus).

It appears by an inquisition taken in the fifth year of King Charles
the First, that the manor then belonged to Ezekiel Grosse, of
Comborne, gent.


THE EDITOR.

The church of this parish has been recently new built with the
assistance of the parliamentary grant. Its situation near the sea adds
much probability to Mr. Tonkin’s interpretation of the name. The great
tithes are appended to those of Maddern, and belonged to the family of
Nichols, now Le Grice.

This parish has to boast of an ancient military work, more curious
perhaps than any other in the west of England. It consists of two
inclosures nearly circular; the inner 174 feet in diameter, the inner
wall 12 feet thick, and still remaining from 10 to 12 feet high;
outside this is a vacant space 30 feet wide, and then the second wall,
having a diameter of almost 230 feet, and built like the other, but
less solid and not so high. The stones are all laid after the
Cyclopian manner, unhewn and without cement; yet, by great labour and
repeated trials, so adjusted as to form a close, even, and apparently
smooth front. All round the interior surface of the inner wall are
traces of rooms resembling in their situation modern casemates, and
near it appear the simple remains of an ancient town. A description
and plan of this most interesting ruin called Castle Chiowne, or
Chioune, contracted into Choon, which is well known to mean the house
in a croft, have been given by Doctor Borlase, in his Antiquities, p.
346 of the 2d edition. There is also a description by Mr. Britton in
the second volume of the Beauties of England and Wales; and a very
accurate plan and section, with a full description, may be found in
the Archæologia published in 1829, volume the 22d, p. 300, by William
Cotton, esq. M.A.

It is to be hoped that the proprietors of the soil will take care to
prevent any further destruction of this most ancient and curious
fortress, by effectually prohibiting a practice which has disfigured
even Rome itself, that of recklessly removing the materials for
domestic purposes.

At about 500 yards to the south-west of the Castle, is a cromleigh
noticed by Doctor Borlase, p. 232.

Morva also contains, either in the whole or in part, the most romantic
granite hill of the western formation. Carn Galva is entirely covered
with blocks of the largest size; and being deep in the granite
district, they have escaped that destruction of natural grandeur which
inevitably accompany the useful or beautifying improvements effected
by the hands of men.

  Morva measures 1060 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815            775    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            18    1    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    282   |    273   |     325    |    377
    giving an increase of 33½ per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is entirely situated on granite, which presents the same
varieties as the granite of Madron, of which indeed it is a
continuation, the granite of both parishes belonging to one and the
same mass.




MORVAL.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Morval lies in the hundred of West, and has to the westward the rivers
Looe and Duloe, to the north St. Kayne and Leskeard, to the east St.
German’s, and to the south St. Martin’s.

In the year 1291, the 20th of Edward the First, (if, at least, I am
right in taking this to be the church there called Capella de Lamana,)
it was valued at £1. 10_s._ being then appropriated to the Priory of
St. German’s.

Morval, a vicarage, stands in the King’s Book at £6. 14_s._ 9_d._

The name of this parish signifies the Sea Valley, it being written
anciently Morevale; not that I would from thence insinuate that the
sea came up formerly to this place, though the same be not impossible.
But as Morval may be interpreted the Mory or Fenny Valley, I rather
take that to be the right.


THE EDITOR.

It is with much diffidence that I venture to approach the subject of
etymologies, but it seems at least to be clear that Mr. Tonkin is
mistaken. Val or Vale is not Cornish for a valley, but an inclosure.
More, in its original signification is great, large, vast, whence
figuratively it has acquired the substantive meaning of a widely
extended tract of land; as the Sea is in English, called the Deep. I
conjecture, therefore, that Morval may be The Enclosed Sea, in
reference to the Loch, which gives names to the towns of East and West
Looe; or, if the substantive and adjective are inverted, and More
resumes its primitive sense, it may be The Large Inclosure.

Mr. Bond states, in his History of Looe, and of the neighbourhood,
that the principal seat in this parish, and a place of the same name
in Cumberland, belonged to Sir Hugh de Morville, “a foul disgrace to
knighthood’s fair degree,” one of those villains who murdered Becket
at the altar in Canterbury Cathedral; but the honour of Cornwall is
not stained by the assassin’s birth. The manor of Morval passed in
early times to the family of Glynn.

Mr. Bond has also preserved a very curious memorial of the lawless and
unsettled state of Cornwall, and probably of all England, during the
contests for plunder, glossed over by the fiction of adverse rights
between two branches of the Plantagenets.

In the year 1471, John Glynn, esq. was barbarously murdered at Higher
Wringworthy, in this parish, by several ruffians, employed by Thomas
Clements, whom he had superseded in the office of Under-steward of the
Duchy. In the preceding year he had been assaulted and grievously
wounded in the face by the retainers of Clements as he was holding the
King’s Court at Leskeard, and thrown into Leskeard prison, where he
signed a compulsory obligation not to prosecute. Some months preceding
the murder, the retainers of Clements went to Morval, and plundered
the house and premises of goods and chattels to the value of two
hundred pounds and upwards, as then estimated. All this appears from
the petition of Jane Glynn, the widow, to Parliament, which sets
forth, that she could have no redress for these terrible outrages in
the county of Cornwall, by reason of the general dread of the malice
of Clements and his lawless gang; she prayed, therefore, that her
appeal might be tried in London by a Cornish jury; and that, in
default of Clements appearing to take his trial, he might be dealt
with as convicted and attainted. Her petition was granted.

The words of Jane Glynn’s petition to Parliament are:

     “The said Thomas Flete &c. then and there, at four of the
     clock in the morning, him feloniously and horribly slew and
     murdered, and clove his head in four parts, and gave him ten
     deadly wounds in his body; and when he was dead they cut off
     one of his legs and one of his arms, and his head from his
     body, to make him sure; and over that, then and there his
     purse and twenty-two pounds of money numbered, and a signet
     of gold, a great signet of silver in the same purse
     contained, a double cloke of muster-de-viles, a sword, and a
     dagger, to the value of six marks, of the goods and chattels
     of the said John Glynn, feloniously from him they robbed,
     took, and bore away.”

The following enumeration of the particulars, as contained in the
schedule annexed to Jane Glynn’s petition, may perhaps be thought
interesting, as giving some idea of the furniture and stock of a
gentleman’s mansion in the reign of Edward the Fourth.

     “Fourteen oxen, ten kien, a bull, eight hors, sixty bolokis,
     four hundred shepe, ten swine, six flikkes of bacon, three
     hundred weight of woll, three brasynpannes, everych
     containing sixty gallon, ten pair of blankets, twelve pair
     of sheets, four matres, three fether beddes, ten coverletys,
     twelve pillowes of feders, four long gounes, six short
     gounes, four women gounes, two drought beddes, a hanging for
     a chamber, three bankenders, twelve quyssions of
     tapsterwork, four cuppes of silver, three dozen of peauter
     vessell, two basons counterfet of latyn, two other basons of
     latyn, two dozen of sylver spoons, a saltsaler of sylver,
     two basons of peauter, two saltsalers of peauter, three
     pipes of Gascoyn wine, a hoggeshede of swete wyne, two pipes
     of sider, four hoggeshedes of bere, four hundred galons of
     ale, three folding tabules, two feyre long London tabules,
     four peyre of trestell, a pipefull of salt beef, a hundred
     of milwell and lyng drye, a quartern of mersau’te lynge, a
     hundred weight of talowe, forty pounds of candell, two
     hundred hopes, ten barrell, fyve large pypes, eight keves,
     ten pots of brasse, fourteen pannes of brasse, four pettys
     of yron, four andyeris, two knedyng fates, a hundred galons
     of oyle, six galons of grese, three hundred pounds of
     hoppes, two hundred bushell of malt, forty bushell of barly,
     sixty bushell of oyts, four harwyis, ten oxen tices, two
     plowes, ten yokk, ten London stolys, four pruse coffers, and
     three London coffers within the same conteyned, four
     standing cuppes covered, whereof one gilt, dyvers evidences
     and muniments concernyng the possession of the said John
     Glynn.” See also Mr. Lysons.

In the very early part of the sixteenth century, Richard Coade, esq.
married Thomasine, daughter and heiress of John Glynn, with whom he
acquired Morval, and in this family the manor continued till Anne, the
daughter and heir of John Coade, carried it by her marriage to John
Buller, second son of Francis Buller, of Shillingham. Their grandson,
John-Francis Buller, married Rebecca, daughter and coheir of Bishop
Trelawny; and on the death of his relation James Buller, of
Shillingham, he succeeded to the family estate, very greatly increased
by a marriage with the heiress of Grosse, a family from Norfolk, which
settled first at Leskeard and afterwards resided in the parish of
Camborne and Trescobays in Budock.

James Buller, son of John-Francis Buller and Rebecca Trelawny,
represented the county in Parliament, and died in 1765.

Mr. Buller married twice, and left Morval, with a considerable portion
of his estate, to John, the eldest son of his second marriage with
Jane Bathurst, daughter of Allen Bathurst, esq. created one of the
twelve Peers by Queen Anne in 1711, and an Earl sixty-one years
afterwards by King George the Third, in 1772. Their second son,
Francis, became one of the Judges of the King’s Bench; and a third
son, Edward, having married a Miss Hoskin, of Looe, lived and died at
Port Looe, in the parish of Tallend. Their eldest daughter, Jane,
married Sir William Lemon, during fifty years member for the county of
Cornwall.

The eldest son of his first marriage settled at Downs, near Crediton
in Devonshire, a property that he acquired by his marriage with
Elizabeth, daughter of William Gould, of that place, which is now the
residence of his grandson James-Wentworth Buller.

Mr. John Buller resided at Morval, represented Exeter, Launceston, and
West Looe in Parliament; and married Ann Lemon, only sister of Sir
William Lemon. He has left a numerous family, and is succeeded by his
eldest son, John Buller, this year (1835) Sheriff of the county.

Arms of Buller: Sable, on a cross Argent, pierced of the Field, four
eagles displayed of the First.

Coode: Argent, a chevron Gules, between three moorcocks Sable.

Glynn: Argent, three salmon-spears Sable.

Grosse: Quarterly Argent and Azure, on a bend Sable three martlets Or.

The manor house at Morval is situated in a beautiful valley surrounded
with trees; and it exhibits a good specimen of a gentleman’s residence
of about two centuries old. The whole place has been very much
improved within the last thirty years.

The seat next of importance in this parish is Bray. And Mr. Bond says
of it, “Bray, Bre, Brea, in Cornish signify a hill; and this place is
situated on the side of Bindown Hill. Bray commands very beautiful
prospects.”

The manor of Bray, then held under the Vyvyans, as of their manor of
Treviderow, was in the reign of Charles the Second in the family of
Heles, who were succeeded by the Mayows, of which family was Dr. John
Mayow, an eminent physician in the reign of Charles the Second, who
contributed some papers on Respiration, and other subjects, to the
Philosophical Transactions. Bray is now the property and occasional
residence of Philip-Wynill Mayow, esq.

Another account which I have met with states, that Philip Mayow, of
Looe, purchased in the sixth of Elizabeth (anno 1504) the manor of
Bree or Bray, in the parish of Morval, of Christopher Copplestone, of
Warleigh, esq. These accounts, therefore, vary; and which is right I
cannot ascertain.

This Philip Mayow, of Looe, is buried in St. Martin’s church, and has
the following epitaph:

  Here lyeth the body of Philippe Mayowe, of
  East Looe, Gentleman, who deceased this lyfe the
  27th day of August in the year 1590, being then
  of the age of 72 years.

        Here under this great carved stone
        Is Phillippe Maiow entombde,
        Who in his life for merchandice
        Was through this land renown’d;
        His trade was great, his dealins just,
        The poor did feel his bountie,
        Great cost he put for sea and land,
        In buildyng verye plentie.

Dr. John Mayow, mentioned by Mr. Bond, and who has been noticed under
St. Martin’s, must have been a very extraordinary man, worthy of being
ranked with the first chemists or philosophers of any age.

In the forty-first number of the publications made by the Royal
Society previous to the regular series of the Philosophical
Transactions, anno 1668, p. 833, will be found an account of two works
by John Mayow, LL.D. and M.D. Tractatus duo. Prior de Respiratione,
Alter de Rachitide (the rickets); see also the Abridgment, vol. i. p.
295, where the authors say in a note, “As an account of the life and
opinions of Dr. Mayow was published only a few years ago by a
physician now living, we deem it unnecessary to insert in this place a
biographical notice of this distinguished chemist and physiologist. We
shall only remark, that in his writings are to be found the primordia
of some of the most important theories and experiments of modern
chemical philosophers.”

The physician alluded to was Thomas Beddoes, of Pembroke College,
Oxford, and afterwards of Clifton, near Bristol, whose life has been
given to the public by Dr. John Edmonds Stock, in one vol. 4to,
printed for Murray in 1811; and his pamphlet is entitled, “Chemical
Experiments and Opinions extracted from a Work published in the Last
Century. Printed at the Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1790.”

Doctor Beddoes here bestows on Mayow the praise he most justly merits,
and to be praised by Doctor Beddoes is laudari a laudato viro. Few
persons ever displayed more genius or power of invention; and to him
we mainly owe the preparation of Humphry Davy for his splendid
philosophical career, after a most fortunate introduction by the
Editor of this Work.

Anthony Wood gives the following particulars of Mayow:

     “John Mayow descended from a genteel family of his name,
     living at Bree in Cornwall; was born in the parish of St.
     Dunstan in the West in Fleet-street, London, admitted
     scholar of Wadham College the 27th of September 1661, aged
     sixteen years; chosen Probationary Fellow of All Souls
     College soon after, and upon the recommendations of Henry
     Coventry, esq. one of the Secretaries of State; where,
     though he had a legist’s place, and took the degrees in the
     civil law, yet he studied physic, and became noted for his
     practice therein, especially in the summer time in the city
     of Bath; but better known by these books, which show the
     pregnancy of his parts.
       De Respiratione, Tractatus Unus. Oxon. 1668-69, 8vo.
       De Rachitide, Tractatus Unus.――Ibid.
       De Sale Nitro et Spiritu Nitro Acerbo.――Oxon. 1674, in a
         large octavo.
       De Respiratione Fœtus in Utero et Ovo.――Ibid.
       De Motu Musculari et Spiritibus Animalibus.――Ibid.
       And all the five were printed again at the Hague in 1681.

     “He paid his last debt of nature in an apothecary’s house in
     York-street, near Covent-garden (having been married a
     little before, not altogether to his content) in the month
     of September 1679, and was buried in the Church of St. Paul,
     Covent-garden.”


Mr. Bond adds, with respect to this parish, that Polgover, sometime a
seat of the Mayows, still belonging to that family; and Lydcott (about
a mile from thence) a seat of the family of Hill, now the property of
Mr. Braddon, are both farm houses.

A manor, or reputed manor, called Wringworthy, belongs to the Copleys
of Bake.

The only place of trade in this parish is a small village, situated at
the spot where the Looe River ceases to be navigable for barges at
high water. There are several kilns for burning lime, which is used to
a great extent throughout all the neighbourhood as a manure; but the
modern name of Sand Place indicates a recent origin. Here the canal to
Leskeard terminates.

The church is in the same beautiful vale as the manor house. It
contains several monuments in memory of individuals belonging to the
families of Mayow, Kendall, Coode, &c.

The great tithes belonged to the priory of St. German’s; and in the
Valor Ecclesiasticus in the time of King Henry the Eighth, preserved
in the First Fruits Office, they are rated,

  Morvall, decimæ garbæ - £10.

The great tithes now belong to Mr. Buller.

The presentation to the vicarage is in the Crown; and the present
Vicar is the Rev. Stephen Puddicombe, presented by Lord Chancellor
Eldon in 1803.

Bindon is the prominent feature in all this country. It commands a
most extensive prospect over Plymouth, and to the range of the
Dartmoor hills; in the other direction the view extends to the high
lands near St. Austell, southward it is bounded by the horizon of the
sea, and it almost reaches St. George’s Channel to the north. The
elevation cannot be less than eight or nine hundred feet; yet strange
to say, the road from Looe to Leskeard still continues to pass very
nearly over the summit of this hill.

  Morval measures 2925 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3910    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           415   10    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    533   |    574   |     615    |    644
    giving an increase of 21 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The rocks of this parish all belong to the calcareous series, and are
similar to those of the adjoining parish of Duloe.




MOREWINSTOW.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Morewinstow is in the hundred of Stratton, and has to the west the
sea, to the north part of Devon, to the east the river Tamar and part
of Devon, to the south Kilkhampton.

This parish is so called from the son of St. Morwen, to whom Marham
church is dedicated.

It is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Books at £10. 8_s._ 6_d._ The
patronage in the Bishop of Exeter.

In the year 1291, the 20th of Edward the 1st, this church was valued
at £13. 6_s._ 8_d._ having since been appropriated to the hospital of
Bridgewater in Somersetshire.


THE EDITOR.

At the general dissolution, the tithes of this parish were valued at
£5. 6_s._ 9½_d._ being a part of the ecclesiastical possessions of the
hospital of St. John at Bridgewater.

The great tithes now belong to the family of Trefusis, through those
of Walpole and Rolle.

This parish forms the north-eastern extremity of the county, and gives
origin to the river Tamar, (Ta-more, the great water,) which flows to
the south coast, there forming the superb harbour of Plymouth. The
portion of Morewinstow adjoining to the Irish channel, partakes of the
rugged grandeur common to this district. The church stands near the
cliff, commanding a fine view of the sea. The building is large,
containing several fine specimens of gothic architecture. It is also
decorated by monuments to the Kempthornes, Waddons, &c. Mr. Lysons
states, that the principal villages in this parish are Coumbe,
Crosstown, Eastcot, Gooseham, Hallabeer, Woolford, and Woolley.

He also states, that Stanbury, a seat and manor in this parish,
belonged to a family of the same name, and gave birth to Richard
Stanbury, Bishop of Hereford, who died in 1471. But Mr. Lysons seems
to have fallen into an error respecting the Christian name of this
individual, and also as to the year of his decease.

John Stanbury was confessor to King Henry the 6th, and made by him the
first Provost of the College, which that unfortunate king founded at
Eton in the 19th year of his reign, 1440-41. He was made Bishop of
Bangor, May 4th, 1448, and translated from thence to Hereford, on the
7th of February, 1453, and died May the 11th, 1474. Little more seems
to be known of this prelate, although he must have been a man of
learning and of much consideration in his time, and one who may fairly
be reckoned among the distinguished persons of the county. The
property of the Stanburys passed to the family of Mannings, and has
been subdivided among heiresses. The great tithes of this manor, and
of some other lands in the parish, have been endowed on the vicarage.

Tonacombe belonged to a family said to have changed their name from
Lea to Kempthorne, although the reason of their doing so is not known.
The family resided there during several descents, till it passed by an
heiress about a hundred and fifty years ago to the Waddons. It has
again passed by a female descent, and is now the property of William
Waddon Martyn, esq.

There is also a farm in this parish called Lea, belonging to George
Thynne Carteret, son of Henry Frederick Thynne, second son of Thomas
Thynne, and Louisa Carteret, daughter of Grace Granville, daughter and
coheir of John Granville, created Earl of Bath by King Charles the 2d.

George Thynne Carteret is Baron Carteret, by a creation, dated Jan.
the 29th, 1784, granted to his father.

This farm may have caused the double names of Kempthorne and Lea.

Cleave house is said to be pleasantly situated; and Chapel house, a
modern building, was the residence of the Hammetts, a family from
Carmarthenshire, and bequeathed to Zachariah Hammett Drake, by his
maternal uncle. It is now by purchase the property and residence of
Thomas Troad, esq.

  Morewinstow measures 7038 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           4201    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           707    7    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    874   |    940   |    1091    |   1102
    giving an increase of 26 per cent. in 30 years.
  The Rev. Denis Young died Vicar of Morewinstow in 1834, having held
    the living from 1807.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

Like the adjoining parish of Kilkhampton, Morewinstow is entirely
confined to rocks of the calcareous series, known in Devonshire by the
name of Dunstone. The schistose and compact varieties of this rock are
extensively exposed on the shores, and in the precipitous cliffs of
Stanbury Creek, where they may be seen curved and contorted in the
most intricate manner.




MULLION.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Mullion is in the hundred of Kerrier, in that part of it called
Maneage, bounded to the west by the Channel, to the north by Cury,
Gunwallo, and St. Mawgan, to the east by Ruan Major, and to the south
by Grade.

This parish has its name from St. Melina, and is dedicated to her. It
is a vicarage valued in the King’s Book at £9. 4_s._ 4_d._ The
patronage in the Bishop of Exeter. The incumbent Mr. Wills. The great
tithes belong to the Chapter of Exeter, with the exception of an
endowment to the vicar made by Robert Lyddra, sometime Provost of
Glassney College, as may be seen in the registry of Exeter.

In the valuation of Pope Nicholas anno 1291, the 20th of Edward the
First, this church is valued at £8; but since it is there called
Ecclesia Sancte Melanie, and that in Usherde Brit. & Eccles.
Primordiis, pp. 145 and 146 (I presume Archbishop Usher De
Christianarum Ecclesiarum, in Occidentis præsertim partibus,
Successione et Statu, London, 1613, 4to. Hamburgh, 1658, London, 1687,
with a continuation. Edit.) the famous St. Malo is called St.
Mellonus, St. Melanius, and Meloninus Britannus, I rather take him to
have been the patron of this church, and to have given his name to the
parish.


THE EDITOR.

The church of this parish has the appearance of antiquity, and the
windows contain some remains of painted glass, exhibiting the arms of
several families heretofore connected with the parish, the De Ferrers
and the Eriseys. There is a marble monument to the Rev. T. Flavell, on
which he is stated to have received his education at Tiverton school,
and to have been a member of Trinity College, Oxford; and that in
addition to this vicarage he had the rectory of Ruan Major, and that
he held a prebend of Exeter Cathedral. He died in 1682.

At the foot of the inscription, which is in Latin, was the following:

  Earth take mine earth, my sin let Satan have it,
  The World my goods, my soul my God, who gave it;
  For from these four, Earth, Satan, World, and God,
  My flesh, my sin, my goods, my soul I had.

The tower was built by Mr. Robert Luddra, probably an inhabitant of
the parish, in 1500.

The great tithes do not form a part of the general funds belonging to
the Dean and Chapter of Exeter, but they are specially appropriated to
support the vicars choral of the Cathedral Church.

The manor of Pradannack is said by Mr. Lysons to have belonged to the
family of Serjeaux, and to have passed from them by a coheiress to the
De Veres, Earls of Oxford. It is now divided into Higher and Lower
Wortha and Wollas, one belonging to Mrs. Agar, heir of the Robartes
family, the other to the Vyvyans of Trelowarren, and the manor of
Clahar to the family of Boscawen.

The parish feast is held on the nearest Sunday to November the 4th;
St. Malo’s day is November the 15th, just with an interval of eleven
days, but in the wrong direction for reconciling the difference by our
change of style. St. Melina is not noticed in the Roman calendar.

The Rev. T. L. Bluett died Vicar of Mullion in 1834.

  This parish measures 4663 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2478    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           299   13    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    529   |    571   |    692     |    733
    giving an increase of 38½ per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

By far the greater part of this parish rests on serpentine, the nature
of which is beautifully displayed in Kinance Cove, where many rocks
are highly polished by the action of the waves, exhibiting a mottled
and variegated surface not unlike the skin of a serpent, from which
resemblance the rock derives its name.

Between Pradanack and the sea, and between the church and the sea,
bounded on the south by the rivulet which flows to Mullion Cove, there
are two patches of hornblende rocks, both massive and schistose. These
rocks are not of the same nature as the greenstone which occur near
the granite, but resemble those of Porthoustock, Cadgwith,
Landowednack, and other places near the serpentine: it is therefore
very probable that the analysers may detect magnesia in both the
hornblende and the felspar, of which these rocks are composed. North
of a line drawn from the church to about the middle of Bolerium Cove,
the rocks appear to belong to the calcareous series.

       *     *     *     *     *

The Editor cannot pass by the mentioning of Kinance Cove without
remarking on the extreme beauty and elegance of its appearance.

Whenever the granite reaches the shore, and it does so only with some
interruptions for a few miles round the Land’s End, the cliffs are
composed of angular blocks piled on each other, seeming with masculine
strength to defy the utmost strength of the ocean. At Kinance, on the
contrary, the whole scenery appears feminine. The rocks are rounded,
smooth, polished, and variegated with beautiful colours; and although
they are of large dimensions, yet every face and every turn is
elegant; the very sand that lies between them is of the most fine and
shining texture. No one desirous of viewing the beauties of Cornwall
should neglect to visit this Cove. The serpentine formation, one of
the most rare, is highly interesting to geologists, with its
accompanying diallage, and veins of asbestos and of steatite,
frequently shot through by native copper in the form of dendrites.
Here too the botanist will find various plants besides the Erica
Vagans, peculiar, in Cornwall at least, to this formation, among which
one of the most rare is the Asparagus Officinalis; and, lastly, the
serpentine of Kinance is now turned in lathes, and made into some of
the most pleasing ornaments for chimney pieces or cabinets.




ST. NEOT.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

St. Neot is situate in the hundred of West, and is bounded to the west
by Cardinham and Warleggon, to the north by Alternun, to the east by
St. Clair, and to the south by St. Pinnock and Leskeard.

This parish takes its name from, and is dedicated to, the famous St.
Neot, whose fabulous miracles are painted in one of the windows of
this church.

It is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book at £9. 11_s._ The
patronage in Mr. John Pomeroy, the widow of Mr. John Robins, and Mr.
Jonathan Randill, for one turn, and in Mr. Christopher Grylls, for the
other; all in right of the manor of St. Neot, to which the great
tithes are annexed. The incumbent Mr. John Parsons.

In 1291, the 20th Edward I. on the taxation of Pope Nicholas, this
church is valued at £10, being then, or since, appropriated to the
priory of Montacute, in Somersetshire; and the vicarage at twenty
shillings.


THE MANOR OF ST. NEOT.

This in Domesday Book is called Neoteston, that is Neot’s Place, and
it was one of the manors given to the Earl of Morton.

In p. 49 of Carew’s History, St. Neot is printed by mistake St. Wot.
(This error is corrected in Lord de Dunstanville’s edition, p. 135.
Ed.)


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Tonkin has not stated with his general accuracy the value assigned
to the vicarage of St. Neot in the Taxation of Pope Nicholas. The
entry in the parliamentary publication stands thus:

  Ecclesia Sancti Rufati (Neoti)      £10  0 0
  Vicar’ ejusdem                        6 13 4

The following entry occurs in the valuation of property belonging to
the priory of Montacute, at its surrender to the king, preserved in
the First Fruits Office.

     Sanctus Neotus.――Valet in exit’ x^{mar’} [~p]dial’ ꝑsonal’ cum
                      al’ casual’ i[~b]^m cõib; annis £14. ult^a
                      13_s._ 4_d._ in feod’ Jo[~h]s Calwey, ball’
                      i[~b]^m, ꝑ annu’ clare £13. 6_s._ 8_d._

Mr. Lysons gives a very detailed account of the different manors in
this parish, and of the descents and alienations of each, but wholly
uninteresting to any others than the proprietors.

The principal manor and advowson of the church, which had been both
divided, are most fortunately again united in the Rev. Richard Gerveys
Grylls, since we are indebted to the taste and to the liberality of
this gentleman, for more than restoring the beautiful decorations of
the church to their original splendour.

The church is situated in a pleasing and retired vale, watered by a
branch of the Fowey river, and abounding with trees; while the country
surrounding it, on almost every side, is even now little cultivated,
and must in former times have been a desert. No situation could be
more adapted for the retreat of an anchorite; and monkish legends
inform us that St. Guevor, or Guervier, or Guerer, fixed his abode at
this place; and in after times, the sound of his name being found to
somewhat resemble the French verb Guerir, to heal, tales were invented
of his performing miraculous cures; and in particular of his having
enabled King Alfred to sit on a horse at the precise moment when his
presence in the field became indispensably necessary to oppose the
pagan Danes.

If St. Guerir ever resided here at all, he must have very opportunely
made way for St. Neot, since it is well ascertained that he also
occupied this retreat in the reign of his brother or relation the
Great Alfred.

St. Neot, having withdrawn from the Abbey of Glastonbury, founded by
St. Joseph of Arimathea, retired into this solitude; where he adopted
the singular penance of plunging himself daily into a well of cold
water, and there remaining immersed to his neck till he had repeated
the whole Book of Psalms. The miraculous powers however bestowed on
him by the Almighty, in recompense for conduct so conducive to the
happiness and well-being of his creatures, forbad St. Neot to remain
secreted. Multitudes flocked to him from all parts; he founded a
monastery, and repaired to Rome for a confirmation and for blessing at
the hands of the Pope: these were readily obtained. He returned to his
monastery, where frequent visits were made to him by King Alfred, on
which occasions he admonished, instructed, and informed the great
founder of English liberty; and finally quitted this mortal life on
the 31st of July, about the year 883, in the odour of sanctity so
unequivocal, that travellers all over Cornwall were solaced by its
fragrance. Nor did the exertions of our Saint terminate with his
existence on earth; he frequently appeared to King Alfred, and
sometimes led his armies in the field. But if the tales of these times
are deserving of any confidence, the nation is really and truly
indebted to St. Neot for one of the greatest blessings ever bestowed
on it. To his advice, and even to his personal assistance as a
teacher, we owe the foundation by Alfred of the University at Oxford.

The relics of St. Neot remained at his monastery in Cornwall till
about the year 974, when Earl Alric, and his wife Ethelfleda, having
founded a religious house at Eynesbury, in Huntingdonshire, and being
at a loss for some patron saint, adopted the expedient of stealing the
body of St. Neot; which was accordingly done, and the town retains his
name, thus feloniously obtained, up to the present time. The monastery
in Cornwall continued feebly to exist after this disaster through the
Saxon times; but having lost its palladium, it felt the roiner’s hand;
and almost immediately after the Norman Conquest, it was finally
suppressed; yet the memory of the local saint is still cherished by
the inhabitants of the parish and of the neighbourhood, endeared
perhaps by the tradition of his diminutive stature, reduced in their
imaginations to fifteen inches of height; and to these feelings we in
all probability owe the preservation of the painted glass, the great
decoration of this church, and one of the principal works of art to be
seen in Cornwall.

The church itself is of the best description, having a nave and two
aisles of equal length, with a square tower at the western end, and
with the rare addition of an embattled parapet towards the south, but
probably not older than the fifteenth century, with the exception of
some parts of the walls near the chancel, which seem to have been a
part of the former church. Soon after the new building had been
completed, individuals in some cases, and associations in others, as
the unmarried men of the parish, the unmarried women, and the wives,
contributed a window, either in honour of the local saint, or of their
particular patrons; and the peculiar attachment felt for the little
saint seems to have preserved these fragile materials at the two
important periods of our modern history, the time when the great
change of religion took place, and at that of the Civil Wars. It may
however be recollected that no violent change occurred here, the
monastic institution having been dissolved by the Earl of Morton, half
brother of the Conqueror; and no place could be more retired from the
observation of strangers, or from the passage of fanatical armies.

From the time of the Reformation, however, all care about maintaining
these decorations ceased, and the whole in a few years more would have
fallen into utter decay, if Mr. Grylls had not nobly stepped forwards,
not to support or repair, but to renew these gems; which he has most
effectually done, at an expense not short of two or three thousand
pounds. The church has now sixteen windows entirely filled with
painted glass of the most beautiful colours and designs; about half of
the whole consisting of the old glass most carefully preserved, and
the new added in a style completely harmonizing with the former: all
executed in London by Mr. J. P. Hedgeland, an eminent artist, to whose
work, with sixteen coloured plates, the reader is referred for a full
description of each window, and of the various subjects it contains:

“A Description of the Splendid Decorations recently made to St. Neot’s
Church, in Cornwall, by J. P. Hedgeland, price £2. 2_s._ To which are
added some Collections and Translations respecting St. Neot, &c. by
Davies Gilbert, M.A. F.R.S. F.A.S.” Printed for the Author in London,
1830, and sold by Messrs. Nichols.

This parish contains a natural curiosity which must not be omitted.

On an elevated part of the uncultivated lands which extend for many
miles to the north and east of St. Neot Church Town, there happens to
be a depression without any channel leading from it; the hollow is, of
course, filled with water, and resting on the granite soil of these
moors, the margin all round is covered by a white siliceous sand, one
of the constituent parts of this compound rock.

Most marvellous stories used to be current respecting this little
lake; no lead could sound the depth of the water, which rose and fell
with the tide, &c.:――but the depth nowhere exceeds two or three
fathoms, and any consent with the tide is obviously impossible. A tale
of a very different nature, connected with this lake, was as
universally repeated, and more than half believed, sixty years ago.

Tregagle is the name of a family not long extinct. Mr. Lysons says
Tregagle, of Trevorder, in St. Breock; arms, Argent, three bucks
passant Or. One of this family having, for some reason, become
unpopular, the traditions respecting a mythological personage have
been applied to him. The object of these tales of unknown antiquity
was, like Orestes, continually pursued by an avenging being, from whom
he could find refuge only from time to time, by flying to the cell or
chapel on Roach Rock; till at last his fate was changed into the
performance of a task, to exhaust the water from Dozmere, with an
implement less adapted, if possible, for its appropriate work, than
were the colanders given to the daughters of Danaus:

  Hocc’, ut opinor, id est, ævo florente puellas,
  Quod memorant, laticem pertusum congerere in vas,
  Quod tamen expleri nulla ratione potestur.

Tregagle is provided simply with a limpet shell, having a hole bored
through it; and with this he is said to labour without intermission;
in dry seasons, flattering himself that he has made some progress
towards the end of his work; but when rain commences, and the “omnis
effusus labor” becomes apparent, he is believed to roar so loudly, in
utter despair, as to be heard from Dartmoor Forest to the Land’s End.

The name of this small lake, about a mile in circumference, has
excited much curiosity, remaining still unsatisfied. I approach
etymology with diffidence, proposing nothing but as a conjecture. On
the second syllable of Doz-mere indeed there has not been a doubt, it
is understood on all hands to mean a lake; now Doz is said in our
glossaries to agree with the English verb to come, but that joined
with water it means the tide; may not Doz-mere then represent the
currently received opinion of these waters ebbing and flowing, and
mean literally the tide lake? The English termination, utterly
destructive of its dignity or importance, is at all events unnecessary
to the sense.

  St. Neot measures 12,789 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815:          4635    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           701   18    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    906   |   1041   |    1255    |   1424
    giving an increase of 57 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Richard Gerveys Grylls, instituted in 1793.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

A line drawn N. W. and S. E. about half a mile north of the church
town, will divide this parish so into two unequal parts, that the
northern, by far the most extensive, will be found to rest on granite,
forming a barren waste for several miles in extent; its valleys,
however, have afforded stream tin in considerable quantities, and of
the very best quality, rendering it therefore probable that this
valuable and rare metal may exist in the granite more than has
generally been supposed. The other portion of the parish is situated
on slate, resembling that of the parishes of Cardinham and St. Clear,
immediately in the vicinity.




NEWLIN, OR ST. NEWLIN.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Newlin is in the hundred of Pider, and joins to the west with St.
Piran in the Sands and St. Cuthbert, to the north with Crantock and
Lower St. Columb, to the east with Little Colan and St. Enador, and to
the south with St. Allen.

This parish takes its name from, and is dedicated to, a female saint,
Sancta Newlina. It is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Books at £16.
13_s._ 4_d._ The patronage in the Bishop of Exeter. The sheaf
appropriated to the Chancellor of Exeter, and held under lease by
Richard Arundell, esq. uncle and heir presumptive to the present John
Lord Arundell, of Trerice. The incumbent Mr. Reginald Trenheale.

The manor of Cargaul, or Cargol, which signifies the holy town, as
having been for a long time, ever since the settling of the Bishop’s
see at Bodmin, part of the lands belonging to the bishoprick still
appertaining to the Bishop of Exeter. I take this to be what in Mr.
Camden is called Caeling, or I do not know where else you will find
that place. There are many ruins at Cargol, which show that it must
have been once a considerable place. A large prison is still standing
there, although now scarcely used, and a barn of the same size; both
show something of its pristine glory, although as to the rest it be
but a sorry village of three or four poor houses.

Treluddero, or Treludra, which is not far from Cargol, and is held
from it.

Humphrey Borlase, esq. of this place, was Sheriff of Cornwall in the
third and fourth years of King James the Second, in the commission of
the peace and lieutenancy, and also a member of parliament; but
following the fortunes of that king, (by whom it is said that he was
created Baron of Mitchell, at St. Germain’s,) he ran out a large
estate, and died a prisoner for debt in the Fleet; and soon after his
decease, this place, with several other lands, were sold under a
decree in chancery, to Sir William Scawen, and the lease of the manor
of Cargol held under the Bishop to Philip Hawkins, esq. to whose son,
the Rev. John Hawkins, D.D. it at present belongs. From hence
originated the well-known apple, the Treludra or Borlase’s pippin; but
the place is so much fallen to decay that no traces remain of the
house, nor even of the orchard. [The small dwelling of a farmer, and a
few stumps of trees, alone mark the spot. Ed.]

To the south of Treludra, just in from the downs, stands the borough
of Mitchell, the best part of which being in this parish, as the rest
is in St. Eroder, Mr. Browne Willis thus describes it: “Mitchell is a
small hamlet, scarce containing thirty houses, all cottages save one,
which is a public inn, not long since erected, which is the only
healed (slated) house in this poor borough. Concerning the antiquity
of this borough, and when it was created so, I have little to say; but
that it first sent members to parliament in the sixth year of Edward
the Sixth, in which return it is called villa Mychell, as it is in all
the ancient indentures, styled burgus or villa Mychell, Mitchell, or
Modishole. Mr. Carew calls it Meddleschale, the name Mitchell never
occurring till in modern times.

The manor of this place is still in possession of the ancient family
of Arundell, of Lanherne, whose ancestor, Ralph de Arundell, purchased
the same in the time of Henry the Third, by whose interest, I presume,
with Richard Earl of Cornwall, King of the Romans, this little town
obtained the privileges of a market and fairs. In anno the thirtieth
Edward the First, John de Arundell (grandson of the aforesaid Ralph,
who had been Sheriff of Cornwall in the forty-fourth of Henry the
Third,) certified his claim to a market and fair in his manor of
Modishole, which he challenged by hereditary descent from Ralph de
Arundell, his ancestor, and pleaded that the said Ralph purchased this
manor of Piers de Ralegh, heir of Walter de Ralegh.

The manor of Degembris was one of those forfeited by Francis Tregian,
esq. (see Probus). It was either given or sold to John Arundell, of
Trerise, esq. by King Charles the First.

In this manor Pallamaunter, or Palmaunter, was formerly a gentleman’s
seat, and gave name to an ancient family since removed to Trevyrick,
in St. Columb Minor.

The manor of Tresulion. Here it is said was born Sir Robert Tresulion,
or Tresilian, Lord Chief Justice of England under Richard the Second,
though some say he was born at another place. It certainly however
belonged to a family of that name, till it went, or rather the barton,
with a female heir, to a branch of the Carnes of Glamorganshire. The
manor went probably, by purchase, to the Arundells. But in the year
1599, Thomas Davies, of Canon Teign, in Devon, esq. seized the barton
under a mortgage, and his descendant, Mary, widow of Sir George Cary,
of Clovelly, in Devonshire, sold it to ―――― Gully, gent. who settled
himself there, from whom, having lost all his children, it devolved on
his nephew Samuel Gully, esq.

The manor of Treworthen was the seat of a very considerable family, of
which Walter de Treworthen, or Treworden, was Sheriff of Cornwall 7th
of Henry the Third, as was Sir Otho de Treworthen 4th Henry the Fifth,
and Sir John de Treworthen was knight of the shire 21st Richard the
Second. The arms of Treworthen were Argent, three boar’s heads couped
Sable, armed Gules. This manor, now reduced nearly to the barton, is
the property of Wills, of Wivelscomb, a minor.


MANOR OF TRERICE.

Mr. Carew says, in Edward the Third’s reign Ralph Arundell matched
with the heir of this land and name, since which time his issue hath
there continued, (not so, for their chief seat was at Efford, Carew,
p. 119, till the reign of Edward the Fourth,) and increased their
livelihood by sundry like inheritors, as St. John, Jew, Durant, and
Thurlebear.

John Arundell, mentioned by Mr. Carew, p. 146, and his father-in-law,
lived to a very great age, being the same who was called “the
Tilbury,” and “John for the King.”

The arms of Arundell of Trerice were, Sable, three chevrons Argent,
but of later times the same as Arundell of Lanherne.


THE EDITOR.

In the taxation of Pope Nicholas, Newlin is valued:

  Ecclesia S’ce Neweline    £9
  Vicar ejusdem              1

The Great Tithes are held on lease by John Hawkins, esq. having been
purchased by him.

The church stands on an elevated ridge, and is conspicuous, with its
lofty tower, from great distances; both are built with stone common in
that district, which is hard, and capable of forming permanent
structures; but the laminated surface of the stone, and its colour,
approaching to olive, are quite unfavourable to exterior beauty. The
inside of the church consists of two long aisles, extending east and
west, with a short cross aisle on either side; the north cross aisle
being appropriated to the manor of Cargol, and that on the other side
to Tresilian. The old carved work of this church has not been
destroyed, and therefore much decoration may be seen on the seats,
presenting the arms of various families, figures, monograms, &c.

Under the eastern part of the church remains a vault appropriated to
the Arundells of Trerice, and against one of the walls over it is a
handsome monument to Margaret Arundell, wife of John Lord Arundell,
and daughter of Sir John Acland, who died in 1691. From this
connection, and from various settlements and arrangements growing out
of it, Trerice, with a considerable estate annexed, has devolved on
Sir Thomas Dyke Acland, late member for Devonshire.

There is also a monument to the Rev. Henry Pooley, the late vicar, who
departed this life in Sept. 1821, esteemed as a clergyman, as a
gentleman, and in his domestic relations. On his decease Doctor
William Carey, then Bishop of Exeter, bestowed the living on the Rev.
Richard Polwhele, in consideration of his eminence in almost every
department of literature.


MANOR OF CARGOLS.

The leasehold property of this manor, purchased by Mr. Philip Hawkins,
remained in his family till his great grandson, the late Sir
Christopher Hawkins, acquired the freehold in the year 1804 or 5,
under the authority of parliament, for redeeming the Land Tax from the
See of Exeter.

The other portion of the Borlase property, sold to Sir William Scawen,
has not remained so permanently in the possession of any family.
Treludra, and its appendages, had certain incorporeal rights, which
made them objects of peculiar attention. Mr. Scawen, who inherited
this property from the original purchaser, sold it to Mr. Basset,
afterwards Lord de Dunstanville; and about the year 1798 it was
finally sold to Sir Christopher Hawkins, who thus united again the
Borlase property in this neighbourhood.

It is now needless to investigate the constitution of the little
borough of Michell, further than to state that the right of voting for
Members of Parliament had been determined to reside in five
individuals, holding certain nominal tenures within the borough, and
denominated mesne lords, and in such persons living within the
borough, as paid scot and lot. These last were in latter times reduced
to four, so as to constitute the five mesne lords a majority.

Nothing could primâ facie appear more absurd, or bear more the
appearance of a childish mockery of representation. But in point of
fact, this and other close boroughs had nothing to do with
representation at all, in the sense usually applied to that word: they
were fortuitous contrivances giving weight to property, and
restraining an assembly partly delegated, and thereby possessing a
strong spirit of freedom, within such bounds as allowed distinct
branches of government to co-exist with this otherwise all powerful
body. They are now swept away, and new institutions seem fast arising;
but whether these shall prove advantageous to the happiness and to the
welfare of mankind, or the contrary, our posterity will be more able
to decide. They may perhaps discover that the apparent obstacles in
our Constitution, really contained the secret springs which gave a
regulated motion to the British Government, when it was esteemed the
wonder and the admiration of the world.

A large extent of waste ground, belonging to the Treludra purchase,
having been enclosed, and efforts made to bring it into cultivation by
various methods, and among these by folding sheep, it received the
name of Shepherds. The late Sir Christopher Hawkins continued with
eagerness what he found commenced; and trying the expedient of
ploughing deep, to remove the stratum of shattered siliceous spar,
which occurs immediately under the peaty turf of all such lands
throughout Cornwall, lead ore was brought to the surface; when this
spirited individual, who is said to have expended five thousand pounds
a year in wages for a considerable length of time, began a mine at his
own expense, and encouraged by its first efforts he brought in an
adit, erected more than one steam engine, and wrought the mine to a
very considerable depth. The quantity of lead raised from the mine
proved sufficient to pay all the expenses, and in addition, the lead
was found to be rich in silver, much above the general average of such
as are usually tested.

All the operations were conducted on the place. The ores were smelted,
silver to the amount of some tens of thousands of pounds value was
extracted from the lead, and the litharge again revived.

In all these matters Sir Christopher Hawkins was mainly assisted by
one whose name I am happy to record.

  His saltem accumulem donis, et fungar inani
  Munere.

Mr. John Giddy was born in January 1760, and having received the
common school education, he found himself compelled to waste the
greater part of his life in an inferior situation at a tin smelting
house. He had however the advantage of much leisure, which he employed
in the cultivation of his mind and in the acquirement of knowledge;
and without any apprehension of my judgment being warped in favour of
one, whom I have esteemed more as a brother than a relation,
throughout a period exceeding fifty years, I will venture to say that
in matters connected with chemistry and practical science, few
excelled him; that in honour and integrity he was excelled by none;
and that in more recondite studies, even in the acquirement of foreign
literature, his progress much more resembled what might be expected
from persons having every artificial advantage in life, than from him
who had been in a great measure deprived of them all. He never
married, and died suddenly in last January (1835), at Shepherds,
having just completed his seventy-fifth year.

I am myself approaching the age of man, and but that children, and
grandchildren, carry our views forward and enliven old age, I should
acquiesce in the sentiment of Juvenal:

  Hæc data pœna diu viventibus, ut renovata
  Semper clade domus; multis in luctibus, inque
  Perpetuo mœrore, et nigra veste senescant.

      And, darker as it downward bears,
      Is stained with past and present tears.

Mr. Lysons says that a manor, called the manor of Newlyn, belonged to
the other branch of the Arundells――that of Lanherne. It may, however,
be remarked that a manor bearing the name of a parish is frequently
limited to a very small part of that with which it would seem to be
co-extensive: in such cases the manor probably derives its name from
the church having been built on it.

Sir John Arundell, who was Sheriff of Cornwall in the 10th year of
Edward the Fourth, lost his life in an attack on St. Michael’s Mount,
then recently seized by Richard de Vere, Earl of Oxford. This
gentleman had removed his residence from Efford, on the coast near
Stratton, and amidst the sands, to Trerice; and these circumstances
gave origin to one of the thousand idle tales invented on such
occasions, and which the diffused intelligence of the present time has
scarcely yet eradicated,――that some foreteller of future events had
warned him of dying in the sand, that he went from Efford to
counteract the will of fate, which became accomplished however at the
foot of St. Michael’s Mount.

The Sir John Arundell, mentioned by Mr. Tonkin as known by the name of
“John for the King,” and as living to a great age, defended Pendennis
Castle with the utmost bravery, after he had passed his eightieth
year; and his son, Sir Richard Arundell, distinguished himself at
several battles in the Civil War. This gentleman, soon after the
Restoration of King Charles the Second, was created Lord Arundell, of
Trerice; his grandson, the last heir male, died in 1773.

The house retains the appearance of a splendid mansion in times passed
by. The south-western wing has been repaired and beautified internally
by Sir Thomas Acland.

Tresilian, improved of late years into a handsome seat, is now the
residence of Richard Gully Bennet, Esq.

The parish feast is kept on the last Sunday in April.

  Newlyn measures 7683 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          6,663    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           451    9    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    735   |    798   |    1045    |   1218
    giving an increase of 65½ per cent. in thirty years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Henry Pooley, collated by Bishop Pelham in
    1815.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish is composed of the same kind of rocks as the neighbouring
parishes of Cubert, Colan, and St. Columb Minor. It is entirely placed
within the calcareous series. At Trevemper bridge is a bed of compact
limestone, similar to that which is so common in many parts of
Cornwall, and is provincially known by the name of black lime. This
rock has been noticed under the head of St. Germans, and it is very
abundant at Rock Ferry, in St. Minver, opposite Padstow.

       *     *     *     *     *

It may be proper to add that Newlyn, west of Penzance, grown to be in
reality a town of some importance, is legally no more than a village
in the parish of Paul, without any separation whatever.




OTTERHAM.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Otterham is in the hundred of Lesnewith, and is bounded to the west by
St. Juliot, to the north by St. Gennis, to the east by Jacobstow, to
the south by Davidstow and Warbstow.

This church, in the taxation of Pope Nicholas, 1291, was valued at £2
by the name of Otham. It is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book at
£6. 14_s._ The patronage in John Saltren, Esq. The incumbent Mr.
Crewys.

There is the manor of Otterham. In Domesday Book it is called Othram,
being one of the 288 manors in this county, which were given by
William the Conqueror to his half brother the Earl of Morton. Mr.
Carew says, “3 H. 4, Will. de Campo Arnulphi held in Otterham 1 fee,”
p. 40.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons states that the manor of Otterham belonged in the reign of
Edward the Third to the Champernownes, that it came afterwards to the
family of Copleston, that John Saltern died possessed of the manor and
the advowson in 1639, in whose family it continued for about a hundred
years. The manor belongs at present to George Welch Owen, Esq. and the
advowson to Mr. William Chilcott, of Tiverton. Mr. Lysons adds, that a
barton in this parish, sometime the property and the residence of a
family called French, is now the property of Charles Chichester, Esq.
The church is said to be small, and not to contain any thing worthy of
attention.

  Otterham measures 2694 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          1,186    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            67    0    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    141   |    176   |     212    |    227
    giving an increase of 61 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is of the same structure as Lesnewith, in its vicinity,
being both situated on the Dunstone and other rocks of the calcareous
series.




PADSTOW.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to Padstow is lost.


TONKIN.

Padstow, in the hundred of Pider, is bounded to the west by St.
Merrin, to the north and east by the sea, its own harbour, and the
river Alan, to the south by Little Petherick.

Leland (Itinerary, vol. ii. fol. 75), speaking of the town here saith,
“this town is ancient, bearing the name of Lodenek in Cornish, and in
English after the true and old writings Adelstowe, Latin, Athelstani
locus, and the town there taketh King Adelstane for the chief giver of
privileges unto it.” In Tax. Benef. 20 Edw. I. it is also called
Eccles’ de Aldestowe, and valued――the rectory in 106_s._ 8_d._ and the
vicar in 13_s._ 4_d._ being appropriated to the priory of Bodmin.
Notwithstanding which I take it that it has its name from the famous
St. Petrock, an abbreviation of Petrockstow, St. Petroc’s Place, to
whom this church is by all allowed to be dedicated, and who most
probably was born here; as more certain it is that he was buried in
St. Petroc’s church in Bodmin, as you may see there.

But Fuller (Worthies in Wales, p. 13), from Bale calls Petrok, a
Welsh-Irish-Cornish man, as having his birth in Wales, his breeding in
Ireland (according to the custom of that age), from whence after
twenty years’ studying he came into Cornwall, and fixed himself at
Petrok’s-stowe, now corruptly Padstowe, from a small oratory so called
from him; that he wrote a book of Solitary Life, whereto he was much
addicted, and flourished anno 560; but Collier from Harpsfield, whose
authority I prefer, makes him to go from Cornwall into Ireland, so
that as I said before we may claim the honour of his birth.

This church is a vicarage, valued at £11. 3_s._ The patronage in
Edmund Prideaux, Esq. the impropriation of the sheaf in Sir John
Prideaux, of Netherton in Devon, Bart.; the present incumbent Mr.
Charles Guy.


THE EDITOR.

The most probable opinion respecting the name of Padstow seems to be,
that St. Petroc originally fixed his hermitage or his monastic
establishment at this place, from whence he afterwards removed to
Bodmin.

At the taxation of Pope Nicholas this parish stands, Ecclesia de
Aldestowe £5. 6_s._ 8_d._; Vicarius ejusdem 13_s._ 4_d._

In the Valor Ecclesiasticus, 26th of Henry the Eighth, preserved in
the First Fruits Office, among the property belonging to the monastery
at Bodmin, the following entries occur with respect to Padstow:

                                     £.  _s._ _d._
  Padistowe, Decimæ garbæ            14   9    6
  Decimæ piscatoriæ                   4   0    0
  Oblac’                              2   0    0
  Reddita et Firmæ Temporalium       10   7    5

Leland says, that the name of this Athelstow indicates its being
founded by Athelstan on his conquest of Cornwall, but this appears
mere conjecture, unsupported by the slightest authority; in
contradiction to the orthography used in the Valuation by the Bishops
of Winchester and Lincoln in 1291, where the name is Aldestowe, not
Athelstowe; and Athelstan’s conquest took place more than three
centuries and a half after the death of St. Petroc.

Mr. Whitaker conjectures that the original monastic establishment of
this Saint occupied the spot, since inhabited by one of greater
learning, and we may fairly presume imbued with a more deep infusion
of real piety, the well known and respected author of the Connection
of The Old and New Testament, and of a variety of other works, all
evincing his profound erudition, strong abilities, and goodness of
heart.

The Prideauxes are understood to have held this property before the
Reformation under a lease for lives from the priors of Bodmin, who
appear to have been high lords, at least, of the whole town.

Mr. Carew, after noticing Padstow, and referring to a charter of
incorporation which unquestionably never had any existence, says, “Mr.
Nicholas Prideaux, from his new and stately house thereby, taketh a
full and large prospect of the town, haven, and country adjoining, to
all which his wisdom is a stay, his authority a direction. He married
one of Viel’s coheirs; and, though endowed with fair revenues in
Devon, maketh Cornwall beholden to his residence. He beareth, Argent,
a chevron Sable, in chief a file with three lambeaux Gules.” P. 144;
340, Lord de Dunstanville’s edit.

This family appears to have been greatly benefited by the
confiscations of those times, since the Devonshire branch acquired all
the ecclesiastical possessions of Bodmin Priory, and what had been
held under lease from the monastery about Padstow, became converted
into freehold; and soon after the possession could be considered as
assured, Mr. Nicholas Prideaux built this house, which continues to be
one of the most handsome and imposing of all the gentlemen’s houses in
Cornwall. The exterior retains its original appearance, the interior
has received various and recent improvements; a splendid staircase is
understood to have been brought from Stowe in Kilkhampton. The late
Mr. Charles Prideaux went into holy orders during the life of his
elder brother; and afterwards assumed the name of Brune in addition to
Prideaux on his succeeding to the estate of that family. He married
Miss Patten, sister of Mr. Peter Patten Bowles; they have left one
son, who is married to Miss Glynn, and three daughters, the eldest
married to Mr. Sawle, of Penrice.

The church is handsome and spacious, and is said to have been built by
Thomas Vivian, Prior of St. Petroc’s, Bodmin, and titular Bishop of
Megara in Greece. It contains several monuments to the Prideaux
family, and to others.

The town is not large, and the harbour is so surrounded by rocks and
obstructed by sand, that vessels even of a small size are unable to
find shelter there when the wind blows on the shore, and security is
much wanted. Plans have been suggested for constructing a mole from
the eastern side of the harbour, near its entrance, so as to greatly
narrow the opening, and by so doing give power to the very extensive
back-water to deepen the channel, and this work, with the removal of
some rocks, would, it is believed, make Padstow a safe place of refuge
for all ships navigating St. George’s Channel or the Severn sea; but
the expense must far exceed all that could be contributed to a private
undertaking, and therefore no hope can be entertained of such an
improvement being made, unless the forming of a safe harbour in such a
situation should be deemed worthy of becoming a national work.

A considerable trade was brought to this part about the middle of the
last century by Mr. William Rawlings, who, emerging from a shop at St.
Columb, raised himself, and conferred benefits on all around him by an
union of talent, industry, and integrity. He was succeeded by his son
Mr. Thomas Rawlings, who served the office of Sheriff in the year
1803, and built a large house just out of the town, named Saunder’s
Hill; but various concerns having proved less successful in the latter
part of his life, and leaving a large family, the property has been
sold, and the house taken down.

It is a curious and singular occurrence respecting the tithes of this
parish, that they have been split; probably in consequence of leases
granted by the priory of St. Petroc. The Prideaux family have
continued to possess the tithe of fish, and some other advantages,
while the general tithes of the parish belong to a gentleman of the
name of Hall.

There are said to have been several chapels in the parish; one
dedicated to St. Sampson, not to the Jewish Hercules, but to a native
of Glamorganshire, born in the fifth century, who after spending years
in solitude, converting whole nations, performing miracles, and in
Britany raising a man from the dead, founded the splendid abbey of
Dole in Franche Comté, where he died on the 6th of July in 564. This
chapel is believed to have been built on the ruins of St. Petroc’s
monastery, destroyed by the Danes in 981, and therefore on the spot
now occupied by Mr. Prideaux’s house, which would be called Padstow
Place, but for the alliteration.

Another chapel stood in a direction from the town, now distinguished
by one of the most beautiful walks any where to be seen, when the high
water overflows the sand of this extensive estuary.

This chapel, called St. Saviour’s, in common with various others in
similar situations, was dedicated by navigators to our Lord, in a
capacity very limited with respect to that of the Redeemer of the
whole world from the destruction caused by original sin; they made it
only as a votive offering in return for their own temporal
preservation from shipwreck.

An account is given in a black-letter pamphlet, written by G. Classe,
of Torrington in Devonshire, of a most melancholy domestic tragedy
which took place in this town early in the reign of King James the
First, arising entirely from the violent spirit of fanaticism then
raging in men’s minds with ten-fold fury in consequence of recent
persecution and existing intolerance. The details had better be
forgotten.

The latitude and longitude of St. Minver spire are given in the
Trigonometrical Survey. Lat. 50° 33′ 31″, long. 4° 51′ 28″; in time
19m. 26s. west of Greenwich; therefore, Trevose Head will be in
latitude 50° 32′ 52″, longitude 4° 57′ 16″; Pentire point in latitude
50° 35′ 15″, longitude 4° 55′ 16″.

Stepper Point, forming the mouth of the harbour, is about a sea mile
south of Pentire Point, and less than half as much to the west. The
time of high water at the change and full of the moon must be between
half past four and five o’clock.

  This parish measures 3073 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           6934    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          1004    0    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {   1332   |   1498   |    1700    |   1822
    giving an increase of nearly 37 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. William Rawlings, instituted in 1790.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are somewhat similar to those of St. Mervyn,
which is already stated to belong to the calcareous series. The rocks
are well exposed on the shores of Padstow harbour, and therefore they
merit a more particular description.

The southern part of this parish consists chiefly of a blue slate,
which in some strata is very fissile, and in other strata it separates
into thick lamellar pieces, and passes in the adjoining strata into
calcareous schist. This slate at Dinah’s Cave contains a bed of black
limestone, which may be a continuation of that on the opposite side of
the harbour at Rock ferry. At the latter place, the transitions
between the blue slate and the limestone are beautifully displayed.

The limestone is of the same nature as that in Veryan on the south
coast. Proceeding towards Slepper Point, at the entrance of the
harbour, after passing the town of Padstow, the cliffs consist of
alternate beds of compact and of schistose greenstone; these continue
to line the shore with broken rocks for more than a mile, and they are
succeeded by red and greenish slates, which are lamellar, of a fine
texture, and rather hard, resembling the mineral called novaculite or
hornestone; and connected with this slate occurs a compact crystalline
rock like that of Trevose Head in St. Mervyn, consisting of small
crystals of glossy felspar, and of a scaly pulverulent mineral of a
greenish colour, the nature of which is not very apparent. This
singular rock may be the equivalent of diallage rock, a member of the
serpentine series, as its position bears a great resemblance to that
of the Lizard magnesian rocks.

At Penniscen Bay, on the north side of the parish, the cliff exhibits
many alternations of limestone and slate; this limestone is more
crystalline than the black limestone of Rock Ferry, approaching nearer
to the Plymouth limestone in its appearance; but organic remains have
not yet been discovered in it.

The slate between the beds of limestone is a calcareous schist, and is
of a white colour, and earthy where it has been weathered; but when
perfect it is found, especially near the limestone, to be of a blue
colour with broad diagonal bands or stripes of brown, precisely like
the calcareous slate which occurs in Werrington, near Yealm Bridge,
where it is extensively quarried for chimney-pieces, and for other
domestic or ornamental purposes.




PAUL.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Paul is in the hundred of Penwith, and is bounded to the west by St.
Burian and Sancreed, to the north by Maddern, to the east and south by
the Channel and Mount’s Bay.

This parish is dedicated to the famous St. Paulinus (and not the
apostle Paul, as it is commonly thought), who was sent by Pope Gregory
the First in 601 from Rome, with St. Justus, to accompany St. Austin
the Monk for the conversion of the Saxons. In 625 he accompanied the
Princess Ethelburgha, daughter to Ethelbert King of Kent, when she
married Edwyn King of the Northumbrians, where he laboured so
effectually that he converted that king and the greatest part of his
people,[7] so that he was consecrated the first Archbishop of York,
and Pope Honorius sent him the pall about the year 630; but, Edwyn
being killed in battle in 633 by Cadwallo King of the Britons, and
Penda King of Mercia, he was forced to fly back into Kent with Queen
Ethelburga and her children, where her brother Eadbald, King thereof,
receiving them with all kindness, made Paulinus Bishop of Rochester,
where he ended his days on the 10th of October 644.

This church is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book at £13. 11_s._
6_d._; the Patronage in the Crown; the Impropriation of the sheaf and
tithes of fish in William Guavis, esq.; the Incumbent Mr. Henry
Pendarves.

In anno 1291, 20 Edw. I. this church was valued at £9. 6_s._ 8_d._
being then appropriated to the Abbey of Hailes, in Gloucestershire. To
this abbey the tithes of corn and fish were appropriated, and so
became lay-fees at the dissolution of the abbey.


THE EDITOR.

It is universally understood that this parish is not dedicated to the
great apostle of Tarsus; and it is rather a curious circumstance that
the word saint, so generally used as a prefix to the names of parishes
in Cornwall, should invariably be omitted in this instance.

The honour of protecting the parish of Paul has been given by
conjecture to St. Paul de Leon, a native of Cornwall, celebrated as a
founder of monasteries, as a zealous and successful champion of the
faith in converting the Pagans of Britany, where he was made the first
bishop of the town, since called from him St. Pol de Leon; but, not
satisfied with the services that he might render to God and man, in
this important station, amidst newly converted Christians, he
endeavoured to make himself more useful by retiring into a solitude,
where he died on the 12th of March, about the year 573, and nearly in
the hundredth year of his age.

The parish feast is celebrated on the nearest Sunday to October the
10th; and although this saint is generally commemorated on the 12th of
March, the day of his decease, yet in his own city of Leon the very
10th of October is consecrated to his memory: which, together with his
being a Cornish man, seems to fix St. Paul de Leon as the Patron
Saint, in opposition to St. Paulinus the first Archbishop of York, who
was sent by Pope Gregory the Great into England shortly after the
mission of St. Austin; his festival is held on October the 12th.

This church and that of Breage were attached to the mitred abbey of
Hailes in Gloucestershire, as founded by one of the greatest promoters
of monastic establishments on record, Richard King of the Romans and
Earl of Cornwall. He began the building in 1246; and in 1251, when he
had expended ten thousand marks in finishing the monastery, he had the
church dedicated to St. Mary on the 9th of November, in the presenee
of the King and Queen, thirteen Bishops, most of the Barons, and above
three hundred Knights, all of whom he entertained with incredible
state and plenty, letting fall this generous and devout expression: “I
wish it had pleased God that all my great expenses in my Castle of
Wallingford had been as wisely and soberly employed.”

Edmund Earl of Cornwall, son and heir of Richard the founder, having,
in his travels through Germany with his father, obtained a relic
considered to be blood of our Saviour, gave a third part to this
monastery in 1272, thereby causing a great increase in the number of
people resorting to it.

In the return made to King Henry the Eighth, preserved in the
Augmentation Office, of the property belonging to this monastery, are
these entries:

                                       £.  _s._ _d._
  Com. Cornub. Paulyn firma rectorie   41   0    0
               S. Breac firma rectorie 47   0    0

This reign, more unsettled, and more disturbed by domestic wars
throughout its whole extent than any other, was nevertheless most
fertile in the production of monasteries; and the honour and castle of
Wallingford, accidentally united with the Duchy of Cornwall in the
person of Richard Plantagenet, King of the Romans, remained so till it
was taken in exchange by Henry the Eighth for certain manors and lands
in Cornwall, known as the new Duchy holdings.

A great part of the lands surrendered by the Abbey of Hailes are in
possession of the Tracy family; but the impropriated tithes of Paul
belonged, in the early part of the last century, to the family of
Gwavas, since which time they have passed with two coheiresses to
Veale and Carlyon.

The church is placed a little beyond the brow of a lofty ridge
ascending from the sea, so that it is not much seen, but the tower
rising above the ridge is visible from a great distance. The church is
large, and contains several monuments to members of different
families,――Godolphin, Pendarves, Hitchins, &c.

In this parish are situated Mousehole and Newlyn, two towns of pretty
considerable size, although, being very near to Penzance, they have
not any regular market.

MOUSEHOLE, formerly called Porth Enys, the Island Port, on account of
a small island close in upon the shore, had in remote times not the
privilege merely, but the actual possession of a market and fairs, but
having been destroyed by a predatory invasion of some Spaniards in
July 1595, and Penzance rising fast into importance, the practice of
holding them has been discontinued ever since.

Mr. Carew, p. 156 (p. 381 of Lord de Dunstanville’s edition), gives a
detailed account of this invasion, which is said to have occasioned
the capture of Cadiz by a combined English and Dutch squadron in the
ensuing year. In Paul church is the following inscription, recording
the savage conduct of these invaders:

     “The Spanyer burnt this church in the year 1595.”

And the parish register commences with this notice:

     “Register of St. Pawle in the countie of Cornwall, from the
     23 daye of Julie, the year of our gracious Lord God 1595, on
     which daie, soon after the sun was risen, the church, tower,
     bells, and all other things pertaining to the same, together
     with the houses and goods, was burned and spoiled by the
     Spaniards in the said parish, being Wensdaie the daye
     aforesaid, in the 37th year of the raigne of our Soveraine
     Ladie Elezabeth, by the grace of God of England, France, and
     Ireland Queene, Defender of the Faith, &c.
          “Per me, JOH’NEM TREMEARNE, Vicarium.”

Entries, 1595:

     “Jenken Keigwyn, of Mousehole, being killed by the
     Spaniards, was buried the 24th of Julie.

     Jacobus de Newlyn occisus fuit per inimicos, et sepultus est
     26 die Julie.

     Similiter Teek Cornall, et sepultus the 26 Julie.”

The cannon ball which caused the death of Mr. Keigwyn, the principal
inhabitant of the place, is still preserved; and to within these few
years an implacable hatred was entertained against the very name of a
Spaniard.

There is said to have been a chapel at Mousehole; and another, on the
island dedicated to St. Clement, served probably for St. Michael’s
Mount, as the island is understood to remain an appendage to that
place.

No satisfactory account has ever been given of the change of name from
Porth Enys to the ludicrous one now in use; there is indeed a cavern
at some distance beyond, spacious, lofty, and strewed with large
rocks, therefore as unlikely to suggest the name as any thing that can
well be imagined. It most likely arose from some trifling circumstance
now forgotten.

NEWLYN is somewhat larger than Mousehole, having annexed to it a
collection of houses called by a mixture of English and Cornish,
“Street Nowan,” the New street.

Both the towns are provided with a pier capable of sheltering small
vessels, and above all of protecting the immense assemblage of boats
employed in the seine fishery, and in driving for pilchards, mackarel,
and herrings; from which large supplies, especially of mackarel, are
sent in the spring to London, and pilchards exported to the amount of
several thousand hogsheads.

The principal family of this parish in early times was probably
Keigwin. To Mr. John Keigwin, born in 1641, we are indebted for the
Translations of Mount Calvary, and of the Creation of the World with
Noah’s Flood, both of which have been printed by the Editor of this
Work, with the original Cornish on the opposite pages; he died about
the year 1710. The affairs of the Keigwins got entangled in family
disputes, accompanied by protracted litigation in the Court of
Chancery, which occasioned their estates to be sold in parcels, and
thus gave rise to the extraordinary number of freeholders in the
parish of Paul.

Mr. Lysons gives the history of several manors, but they do not
contain any thing curious.

The younger branch of the Godolphins, which settled at Treworveneth,
having acquired it by a marriage with the daughter and heiress of John
Cowling of that place, became extinct by the death of Col. William
Godolphin in 1689.

Trungle was the seat of Mr. Hitchens, and afterwards became the
residence of Capt. Clutterbuck, a gentleman from Kent, who came into
Cornwall as commandant of the garrison at Scilly. He married a Cornish
lady, and settled there. His son practised the law at Marazion.

The late Mr. John Price commenced the formation of a pretty retreat in
a small declivity near the ridge of this parish, at a place called
Chi-owne, the house in a croft. Trees were found to flourish there,
and the whole promised so much that his son Mr. Rose Price began to
lay the foundation of a handsome seat on an adjoining farm; and he
went so far as to construct an immense mound to act as a shelter for
trees, and also to give them an elevation on its slope, a work which
the country people named “The Chinese Wall:” the whole was, however,
discontinued for want of sufficient space, which was afterwards
afforded in the adjacent parish of Maddern by the purchase of
Trengwainton.

It is not easy to imagine a more beautiful view than the one obtained
from the summit of the hill above Newlyn; the ascent is, however,
extremely steep, and in consequence a new line of road has been
projected; but the great value and subdivision of land will probably
defeat the execution of a plan having more for its object the
decoration of the country than any facility of communication, although
that would be found important.

Not far from the top of this hill is erected a small stone monument by
the late Mr. John Price, to commemorate a circumstance scarcely
deserving of such attention, which was no more than the finding of a
gold ring with the motto on it, “In hac spe vivo.” Mr. Price indeed
conjectured that it had belonged to some gentleman engaged in the
remote Plantagenet Civil Wars, and with much ingenuity contrived a
series of adventures to suit the occasion and the sentiment.

Another curiosity, discovered much about the same time, is far more
deserving of regard. Of this Mr. Lysons has given an engraved plate
with the following description:

     “In 1783, one of the ancient British ornaments of gold, in
     the form of a crescent, with a narrow zigzag pattern
     slightly engraven on it, and weighing two ounces, four penny
     weights, and six grains, was discovered near the remains of
     one of the circular earthworks in the neighbourhood of
     Penzance. This curious relic is now in the possession of
     Rose Price, esq.”

Gold ornaments, similar if not identical with this very curious
remnant of remote antiquity, have been found in other parts of this
island, and also in Ireland. One very like it in bronze, taken from a
stream pool in 1802, is in the possession of Mr. William Rashleigh at
Menabilly.

Objects so interesting have not failed of exciting investigation and
conjecture; and they have been fancied to be a decoration of the chief
priest among the Druids, worn round his head, and indicating by the
crescent shape the exact age of the moon best adapted for ensuring the
greatest possible virtues to the holy misletoe, which was then to be
severed from its parent oak.

  Paul measures 2,865 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          7,464    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           785    7    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {   2937   |   3371   |    3790    |   4191
    giving an increase of 42½ per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. C. G. Ruddock Festing, presented by Lord
    Chancellor Eldon in 1826.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

A narrow belt of slate, belonging to the porphyritic series, bounds
this parish on its eastern side, as far south as the village of
Mousehole; it consists for the most part of hard massive and schistose
varieties of compact felspar, occasionally spotted or intimately
blended with actynolite and hornblend, or with some mineral
intermediate between them. The rest of this parish is situated on
granite, exhibiting the same varieties as that of Burian and St.
Levan. At Mousehole the slate and granite may be seen in contact with
each other, the granite occurring as veins in the former rock.


     [7] He was consecrated a Bishop by Justus, then Bishop of
     Rochester, before he went.




PELYNT, OR PLYNT.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN AND WHITAKER.

Pelynt, vulgo Plynt, lies in the hundred of West, and joins to the
west with Lantegles and Lansallas, to the north with Lanreath, to the
east with Duloe and the river Loo, to the south with Tallant. In
Domesday Book this parish is called Pluwent.

This church is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book at £17. 18_s._
6_d._; the patronage in John Francis Buller, esq. the incumbent Mr.
Howell.

This church, in anno 1291, 20 Edward I. was valued, (Tax. Benef.) viz.
the rectory at £8, being then appropriated to the abbey of Wilton, in
Wiltshire; and the vicarage at 40_s._

The manor of Plunent, vulgo Plynt. By Domesday Book it appears that
this was one of the two hundred and eighty-eight manors given by
William the Conqueror to Robert Earl of Morton, when he made him Earl
of Cornwall. In the extent of Cornish acres, 12 Edward I. (Carew, fol.
49,) Plenynt is valued in nine.


THE EDITOR.

This parish is named in the valuation of Pope Nicholas, Pleymut or
Palemyt. It paid at the general suppression of religious houses, £4.
15_s._ a year to the priors of Wilton.

The church is spacious, although it has only two principal aisles,
with two family aisles, standing across the other on the south side.

There are various monuments in the church. A very large monument to
Francis Buller, esq. ornamented with the figures of himself and of his
wife in an upper compartment, and of twelve children below, besides
other figures, and numerous coats of arms. This gentleman died in
1615. There is also a monument to Edward Trelawny, a barrister, much
noted on account of its quaint and singular inscription, said to have
originated from his never having practised his profession, except once
gratuitously, to vindicate an individual suffering under some
oppression:

            Edward Trelawny.   Ana:
              We wander, alter, dy.

    O what a bubble, vapour, puff of breath,
    A nest of worms, a lump of pallid earth,
    Is mud-wall man; before we mount on high,
    We cope with change, we wander, alter, dy.

  Causidicum claudit tumulus (miraris) honestum.
      Gentibus hoc cunctis dixeris esse novum.

    Here lyes an honest lawyer, wot you what?
    A thing for all the world to wonder at.

             June the 7th, 1630.

There are memorials to William Achym, Esq. as far back as 1589; to a
de Bodrigan; and several to the Trelawnys.

William of Worcester states this church to have been the burial place
of St. Juncus, a holy personage not recorded in the Roman calendar.
But Mr. Whitaker, without citing any authority, gives the patronage of
the church and parish to St. Nunn, the mother of St. David, the
Apostle of Wales, the first Archbishop of Menevia, since called after
his name, and according to romance writers the champion, who having
distinguished his levies by a leek as a cognizance, defeated the
Saxons in a night attack, and drove them beyond the confines of his
province.

This church belonged to the Cistercian abbey of Newenham, in
Devonshire, founded by Reginald de Mohun, lord of Dunster, about the
year 1241.

In the return made to King Henry the Eighth, and preserved in the
Augmentation Office, occur these entries:

                                              £.  _s._  _d._
  Plenynt Redd. lib. ten.                      1   15    4
          Redd. tam cust’ quam convent’ ten’  21    5    7
          Redd. Firma Rector’                 14    0    0
          Redd. Perquis. cur’                  0   11   10
                                             ―――――――――――――
                                              £37  12    9

The site of this monastery was granted by Queen Elizabeth to Thomas
Howard, Duke of Norfolk, but sold by one of his sons to Sir John
Petre, in whose family it continued till so recently as the year 1824.
It was then sold to James Alexander Frampton, esq.

The manor of Pelynt, with the privilege of a fair on Midsummer day,
parcel of this abbey, have travelled by some other channel to Colonel
Frederick William Buller; and the manor of Hall, the great tithes, and
the advowson of the living, belong to Mr. John Buller, of Morvall.

On the barton of Hall are some remains of ancient military works.

But the place of greatest note in this parish is Trelawn, for more
than two centuries the principal seat of the Trelawnys; but,
notwithstanding the great similarity of the two names, not having any
connection one with the other, although, by a temptation too strong to
be withstood, the place has recently been known by the name of its
proprietor.


THE HISTORY, AS GIVEN BY MR. BOND.

This place, at an early period, belonged to the Bodrigans. Sir Henry
de Bodrigan gave it as a marriage portion with his daughter to Henry
Champernowne. The heiress of this branch of the Champernownes married
Polglass Herle. Sir John Herle the younger, who died without issue,
settled the reversion of Trelawn on Sir William Bonville, the last of
an ancient Devonshire family (summoned to Parliament Sept. the 23d, in
the 28th year of Henry the Sixth, as Baron Bonville, which barony in
fee became forfeited by the attainder of his great-grandson Henry
Grey, Duke of Suffolk, in the first year of Philip and Mary. Ed.) It
was a very remarkable circumstance attending this family, that the
havoc of Civil War annihilated three generations within the space of
two months. At the battle of Wakefield Lord Bonville witnessed the
death of his son Sir William Bonville, and of his grandson William
Lord Harrington, who enjoyed that title according to the custom of
those days, as having married Elizabeth, the daughter and heiress of
Lord Harrington, of Harrington, possessed of a barony in fee. This
battle took place on the last day of December 1460. And in the month
of February following the aged grandfather, Lord Bonville himself, was
taken prisoner at the second battle of St. Alban’s, and although his
life had been promised, he was beheaded by the order of Queen
Margaret, who bore resentment against him, as being one of those who
had custody of the king’s person after the battle of Northampton.
Elizabeth Lady Harrington, after the accession of Edward the Fourth,
had a large dower assigned her out of Lord Bonville’s estates in
Cornwall. Her only daughter by Bonville brought Trelawn, and other
estates, to Thomas Grey, Marquis of Dorset. On the attainder of his
grandson Henry Duke of Suffolk, they were seized by the Crown. Queen
Elizabeth, in the 42d year of her reign, sold the manor of Trelawn and
the lands of Hendersich and Portello, in Talland prrish, to Sir
Jonathan Trelawny. The old and famous family of Trelawny take their
name from the barton of Trelawny, in the parish of Alternun. The arms
of this family are Argent, a chevron Sable, sometimes charged with
three oak-leaves Proper.

It is said that Sir John Trelawny was so eminent in the wars of
France, that King Henry the Fifth, on the 27th of September, in the
seventh year of his reign, at Gison in Normandy, granted him £20
yearly for life, as a just recompense for his signal services; and
that Henry the Sixth was pleased to confirm it to him in the first
year of his reign, and granted to him an augmentation to his arms, the
three oak-leaves. He was certainly the first of this family who bore
that addition. Under the picture of Henry the Fifth, which stood
formerly on the gate at Launceston, was this rhyme:

  He that will do aught for me,
  Let him love well Sir John Trelawnee.

There was an ancient saying in Cornwall, That a Godolphin was never
known to want wit, a Trelawny courage, or a Glanville loyalty.

Mr. Lysons says, Lord Bonville built a castellated mansion at
Trelawny, a part of which, with two towers, remain on the eastern side
of the present house. Sir John Trelawny nearly rebuilt the house, soon
after his purchase of the estate. It was again nearly rebuilt by
Edward Trelawny, esq. Governor of Jamaica, after a fire, which
happened about the middle of the last century. There are several
family portraits in the house, two of the Bishop of Winchester; he
built a chapel there, on the site of a former one, and the following
inscription remains:

    “This Chapel was consecrated by the Right Rev.
  Father in God, Sir Jonathan Trelawny, Bart. Lord Bishop
      of Exeter, on Monday, 23d day of November,
                    Anno Dom. 1701.”

Without adverting to ancient times, two members of this family have
been distinguished in times more recent, Doctor Jonathan Trelawny, and
one of his sons, Edward Trelawny, esq.

Of the first Wood says, in his Athenæ Oxonienses:――

Jonathan Trelawny, son of Sir Jonathan Trelawny, of Trelawny, in
Cornwall, Baronet, was born, as I have been informed, at Pelent, or
Pelynt, in the same county, educated at Westminster School, entered
into Christ Church in Michaelmas Term 1668, aged 18 (born therefore in
1650); and in the year following was made student thereof. Afterwards
he took the degrees in arts, holy orders, and one or two benefices in
his own county, conferred upon him by his relations.

In 1680 his eldest brother died, and thereupon, though the title of
baronet and the paternal estate of his family were to come to him
after the death of his father, yet he stuck to his holy orders,
continued in his functions, and upon the translation of Doctor John
Lake to the see of Chichester, was nominated Bishop of Bristol by his
Majesty, (King James the Second, Nov. 8, 1685,) whereupon, after he
had been diplomated doctor of divinity, he was consecrated, November
the 8th 1685, in the Archbishop’s Chapel at Lambeth, and introduced
into the House of Lords with Dr. Ken, Bishop of Bath and Wells, on the
11th day of the same month. On the 8th of June 1688 he was one of the
six Bishops, besides Doctor Sancroft the Archbishop, that were
committed prisoners to the Tower of London, for the alleged offence of
contriving, making, and publishing a seditious libel against his
Majesty and his government; that is for subscribing a petition to his
Majesty, wherein he and the rest of the said Bishops showed the great
averseness that they found in themselves to the distributing and
publishing in all their churches his Majesty’s late declaration for
liberty of conscience, &c. Where continuing till they were publicly
tried in Westminster Hall for the same, they were, to the great joy of
the true sons of the Church of England, released thence on the 15th of
the same month. Subsequently, however, the see of Exeter was conferred
on him by King James, vacant by the translation thence to York of
Doctor Lamplugh; and about the 7th of April following, his Majesty
King William the Third was pleased to give his royal assent for him,
the said Doctor Jonathan Trelawny, Bishop of Bristol, to be Bishop of
Exeter, in the place of Doctor Lamplugh, beforementioned.

From the Fasti it appears that Jonathan Trelawny, of Christ Church,
was admitted Bachelor of Arts on the 14th of May 1672, and Master of
Arts April the 29th, 1675. And on October the 26th, 1685, Sir Jonathan
Trelawny, Bart. Master of Arts of Christ Church, the nominated Bishop
of Bristol, was diplomated Doctor of Divinity.

As this gentleman was made Bishop of Bristol by King James the Second,
and after his commitment to the Tower and acquittal, accepted from him
an appointment to the bishopric of Exeter, almost the last act of that
king’s government, which appointment was almost immediately confirmed
to him by King William on his joining in the Revolution, one may apply
in his case the observation made by the most philosophical writer of
English history, on the Duke of Marlborough, when he led over Queen
Anne to the Prince of Orange.

     “This conduct was a singular sacrifice to public virtue of
     every duty in private life, and required for ever after the
     most upright, disinterested, and public-spirited behaviour
     to render it justifiable.”

He was further advanced by Queen Anne, being again translated, on the
14th of January 1707, to the see of Winchester. He died on the 21st of
June 1721.

He married Rebecca, daughter and coheiress of Thomas Hele, esq. of
Boscome, in Devonshire, and left a numerous family, but none of his
sons left families, and only two of his daughters; Letitia, who
married her cousin Henry Trelawny; and Rebecca, married to Mr. John
Buller, of Morvall.

Few men ever obtained so great a share of popularity among all ranks
and degrees in his own country as did the Bishop, when he protested
against the insidious declaration of King James the Second, and
sustained persecution in consequence of the support he had given to
the Church of England. Fears were entertained, or apprehensions were
industriously circulated, of extremities never contemplated; and the
prompt acquittal of the Bishops seems alone to have prevented Cornwall
from rising in arms.

A Song was made on the occasion, of which all the exact words, except
those of what may be called the burden, were lost, but the whole has
recently been restored, modernized, and improved by the Rev. Robert
Stephen Hawker, of Whitstone, near Stratton.

The strong sensation excited throughout England, by that decisive act
of bigotry, tyranny, and imprudence, on the part of King James the
Second, by which he committed the seven Bishops to the Tower, was
in no district more manifestly displayed than in Cornwall,
notwithstanding the part taken by that county in the Civil War. This
was, probably, in a great degree occasioned by sympathy with this
respected Cornish gentleman, then Bishop of Bristol. The following
Song is said to have resounded in every house, in every highway, and
in every street.

  A good sword and a trusty hand,
    A merry heart and true;
  King James’s men shall understand
    What Cornish men can do.

  And have they fix’d the Where and When?
    And shall TRELAWNY die?
  Then twenty thousand Cornish Men
    Will know the reason why!

  Out spake the Captain brave and bold,
    A merry wight was he,
  Tho’ London Tower were [8]Michael’s Hold,
    We’d set TRELAWNY free!

  We’ll cross the Tamar, land to land,
    The Severn is no stay;
  And side by side, and hand in hand,
    And who shall bid us nay!

  And when we come to London Wall,
    A pleasant sight to view,
  Come forth! come forth! ye cowards all;
    Here are better men than you.

  TRELAWNY he’s in Keep and Hold;
    TRELAWNY he may die!――――
  But twenty thousand Cornish bold
    Will know “The Reason Why.”

The song may be sung to the tune of “Auld lang syne.”

The seven Bishops were:

     William Sancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury; consecrated
     1678; deprived 1690-1; ob. 1693.

     William Lloyd, Bishop of St. Asaph; consecrated 1680;
     translated to Lichfield and Coventry, 1692; and to Worcester
     1699; ob. 1717.

     Thomas Ken, Bishop of Bath and Wells; consecrated 1683;
     deprived 1690-1; ob. 1710.

     Francis Turner, Bishop of Ely; consecrated 1683; deprived
     1690-1; ob. 1700.

     John Lake, Bishop of Chichester; consecrated 1682; suspended
     at the Revolution, but died 1689.

     Thomas White, Bishop of Peterborough; consecrated 1685;
     deprived 1890-1; ob. 1698.

     Sir Jonathan Trelawny, Bishop of Bristol; consecrated 1685;
     translated to Exeter in 1689, to Winchester in 1707; ob.
     1721.

Bishop Trelawny has left at Christ Church a very valuable, esteemed,
and appropriate memorial of himself, and of the Founder. Over the
south-east gate of the great quadrangle, leading to the staircase of
the hall, is a fine statue of Cardinal Wolsey, with the following
inscription:

    Eminentissimo Cardinali Thomæ Wolseio,
    viro inter hæc menia semper memorando,
                       P.
  Reverendus in Christo Pater Jonathan Trelawny,
  de Trelawny, in comitatu Cornubiæ Baronettus,
           hujusce Ædis olim Alumnus,
    Wolseii in Episcopatu Wintoniensi successor,
  et Wolseianæ erga hanc Domum munificentiæ æmulus,
                  A. D. M.DCC.XIX.

Edward Trelawny, esq. one of the Bishop’s sons, had the honour of
being made Governor of Jamaica; and most fortunately for the Island,
besides many other prudent and judicious acts, he pacified a
formidable body of revolted negroes, who had long sustained a savage
independence, held the fastnesses belonging to the chain of mountains
which divides Jamaica throughout its whole length, and maintained a
predatory war against all the settlers. The treaty with these people,
called Maroons, was in itself so equitable that it continued to be
observed up to the period when the whirl of political opinions in
Europe, mingled with others of fanatical enthusiasm, extended to these
people, and in consequence they were all either exterminated or sent
to perish in distant countries.

Sir William Trelawny, the sixth Bart. great-nephew of Edward Trelawny,
was also Governor of Jamaica, in less trying times, and the period of
his service was cut short by a premature death in 1772, when the
property descended to his only son, Harry Trelawny, then a boy at
school.

The career of this individual, though extraordinary and eccentric,
need not be given in any detail. He appears to have been a man of
naturally a strong understanding, but having imbibed the spirit of
fanaticism in early youth, it carried him in all directions, as fancy
guided, with equal facility; but in general directly against the
consent of modern opinions, which have repudiated implicit confidence
in traditions, in the decrees of councils, and in the dicta of ancient
fathers, or of popes, substituting in their place the exercise of
private judgment; guided no doubt in practice by the teacher who
happens to carry with him the fashion of the day.

Sir Harry Trelawny commenced preaching at Westminster school. He
proceeded to Oxford, where in consequence of nonconformity he could
not obtain a degree. He then took orders in the church of Scotland,
and began a course of preaching in various meeting houses, especially
in one of his own erecting at West Looe. In the course of a few years,
after the novelty had worn away, he complied with the requisite
observances at Oxford and was admitted to a degree. He then received
orders as a clergyman of the Church of England from Doctor John Ross,
Bishop of Exeter, and soon afterwards the living of St. Allan, which
he exchanged with his relation Dr. William Buller, the succeeding
Bishop, for Egloshayle. This living he ultimately resigned on becoming
a Roman Catholic, and died in Italy, February the 25th, 1834, having,
as it is said, received the nominal honour from the holy See of being
appointed a Bishop in Partibus Infidelium. He married Anne, daughter
of the Rev. James Brown, of Somersetshire, and has left a large
family.

An event connected with the death of this gentleman, and which
occurred about a year afterwards, roused the scorn of the whole
parish, and of the neighbourhood, more than any thing that has taken
place there within the memory of the oldest person.

Several priests arrived from the continent, bringing with them an
empty coffin, and the various apparatus used in Catholic services,
when masses were said and requiems sung at Trelawny for the peace of
this individual’s soul, who had died and was buried in Italy, where it
would seem that these pageants should have been celebrated, on the
double supposition of their being really efficacious, and that the
Almighty is incapable of hearing them from any other than a single
spot. For if the latter supposition were not admitted, they might as
well have been performed in France, from whence it is apprehended the
priests embarked, unless indeed we suppose of these as of other
histriones, that Μονον αργυρον βλεπουσιν; and in regard to such a
subject, we may fairly go on to add, without want of charity, Απολοιτο
πρωτος αυτος ὁ τον αργυρον φιλησας.

His eldest son, Sir William Lewis Salusbury Trelawny, married
Patience, only daughter of John Phillipps Carpenter, esq. of Mount
Tavey, near Tavistock, and is now one of the members in parliament for
Cornwall, residing for the present at Harewood, on the banks of the
Tamar.

  Pelynt measures 4,170 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          4,732    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           594   19    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    630   |    708   |     750    |    804
    giving an increase of 27½ per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of this parish resemble those of Lanreath and Duloe, the
adjoining parishes; and belong, therefore, to the same calcareous
series.


     [8] St. Michael’s Mount.




ST. PIRAN, OR PERRAN ARWORTHALL, IN KERRIER.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN AND WHITAKER.[9]

The manor of Arworthal (which signifies, upon the noted river,) giving
the name of distinction to this parish, and taking in the greatest
part of the lands thereof, I shall begin with it.

In 3 Henry IV. John Fitz William held half a knight’s fee in
Arworthall, per cartam Edwardi quondam com. Cornub. dict. feod.
Mortan. (Carew, p. 126, Lord Dunstanville’s edition,) which Edward
Earl of Cornwall must be Edward de Caernarvon, afterwards King of
England, the 2d of that name, for there was no other Edward Earl of
Cornwall. Elizabeth, the daughter and heir of this Sir John Fitz
William (for he was a knight) brought the manor, &c. into the family
of Mohun in which it continued till the reign of James the 1st, when
Sir Reginald Mohun, to raise fortunes for his children by his third
wife, sold this manor to Samuel Pendarves of Roscrow, esq. in whose
posterity it yet remaineth, Mrs. Bassett, the sole heir of that
family, being the present lady thereof.

On the wastrell of this manor have been large quantities of tin dug up
from time to time; and just above the village of Perran Arworthall, by
the pound near Perran Well, there is a strong chalybeate spring much
frequented of late years.

In this parish did antiently dwell the family of Renaudin, by their
name of French extraction, but where I cannot positively say; and here
dwelt, temp. Ricardi II. David Renaudin, who married Margaret, the
eldest daughter and coheir of James Daungers of Carnclew. John
Renaudin, their son, dying without issue temp. Henry V. this estate
fell to Richard Bonython of Carclew, who had married Isabel, the other
daughter and coheir of the said James Daungers, in which family of
Bonython (whose heiress still lays claim to it, and, as by original
deeds, it appears very justly,) it continued to the reign of Charles
I. when Peter Beauchamp of Trevince, esq. having a lease of it for
three lives, from John Bonython, esq. his posterity have been
strangely outed of the fee ever since; which has of late years past
through several hands, and is now vested in Thomas Hearle of Penryn,
esq.

The arms of Renaudin, as painted in the old glass windows at Carnclew,
were Sable, a chevron between three swans Argent.


THE EDITOR.

This parish, with two others, are dedicated to St. Perran, the most
distinguished among the missionaries from Ireland, who converted the
Pagan inhabitants of Cornwall to the Christian faith; but his history
properly falls under the head of Perran Zabuloe, where he fixed his
residence and breathed his last.

The church of Perran Arworthall is very small but neat, and it is
decorated with a tower in due proportion to the whole fabric. The only
ancient village of any consequence in the whole parish, is called
Perran Well, probably from the chalybeate spring flowing near it; and
this village has imparted its name in common parlance to the whole
parish.

Perran Well is situated in a deep valley, having a hill and a
corresponding vale on either side, terminating in the Carnon branch of
Falmouth harbour: over all these the high road leading from Truro to
Falmouth used to pass; but by a most judicious improvement a causeway
has been laid over Carnon, and these transverse hills and valleys
entirely avoided.

Not far below the village stood one of the tin-smelting houses
constructed after the Germans introduced reverberatory furnaces; it
has been used for the last thirty years for refining arsenic. This
metal and its oxide, most destructive to animal or to vegetable life,
is extensively useful in metallurgic operations and in the arts. Few
substances are more generally diffused throughout mining districts: it
unites with most other metals, sometimes alone, but more frequently in
union with sulphur, and converts them into minerals. Metals are
therefore said to be mineralized by arrenic, by sulphur, &c. The first
operation used in extracting metals from their ores, is one for
driving off by heat such substances as are volatile. Arsenic is
eminently so: it therefore sublimes, and is deposited in long flues or
chambers made to prevent the destructive consequences of its being
diffused through the atmosphere, and scattered over the country. From
these chambers or flues the refiners of arsenic obtain their supplies,
and are thereby enabled to afford it in a state of purity, at such
prices as would be wholly inadequate for defraying the expense
necessarily to be incurred, if the operation had commenced on the ores
containing this metal in the mines.

Partly in this parish, but principally in Milor, on the next creek
towards Falmouth, are situated the great iron works, conducted by
Messrs. Fox, a family distinguished for ability, exertion, and
liberality, from generation to generation. These works were the first
constructed of any magnitude in Cornwall. Previously, all the
cast-iron materials for steam engines were brought from Glamorganshire,
and the working of an important mine very frequently depended on the
uncertain direction of the wind; now every thing that can be required,
even cylinders of the largest dimensions, seven feet and a half (90
in.) in diameter, and ten or twelve feet long, are cast and bored with
the utmost accuracy here and at Hoyle, where similar works have
arisen, to the incalculable benefit of the mining concerns.

The valley above and below these works is perhaps the most beautiful
in the west of Cornwall, and it has recently been adorned, just
opposite the fine woods of Carclew, by the elegant and tasteful
residence of Benjamin Sampson, esq. who conducts an extensive
manufactory for supplying the mines with gunpowder made in their
immediate neighbourhood.

This parish, and the adjacent one of Stithyans, to which it is
annexed, are believed to have been appropriated to the religious
establishment at Penrey. The impropriation of the great tithes, and
the advowson of the vicarage, have for a considerable time belonged to
the Boscawens of Tregothnan.

  Perran Arworthall measures 1,229 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2165    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           451   15    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    884   |   1104   |    1362    |   1504
    giving an increase of 70 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The western part of this parish is similar to the slate of Gwennap:
the whole appears to belong to the porphyritic series; but on the
extreme eastern part it makes a nearer approach to the calcareous
series of Feock.


     [9] The observations made on Mr. Tonkin’s narrative in this
     and in other parishes, usually marked with brackets, are by
     Mr. Whitaker.




PERRAN UTHNO, OR LITTLE PERRAN.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

St. Piran Uthno, commonly called Little Perran, is in the hundred of
Penwith, and is wholly surrounded to the north, west, and east, by St.
Hilary, and to the south by the sea. In the Tax. Benefic. this is
called Ecclesia de Udnow Parva, and in common speech Little Piran,
from its smallness, not containing above 900 acres in all; but it was
of greater extent formerly, the sea having much encroached upon it.

This is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book, £17. 11_s._ 3_d._; the
patronage in Sir John Trevillian, bart.; the incumbent Mr. John
Davies. It hath its other adjunct of Uthno [which appears from the
Tax. Benef. above, to be the original name of the parish, and to have
since had the name of the saint prefixed to it] from the manor of
Uthno.

In the 3d of Henry IV. the heir of Mark de Walesbreu held two parts of
a fee here, for Veno there is plainly a mistake for Uthno: since which
time it has had the same lords as Whalesborough; the present lord of
this manor being Sir John Trevelyan of Nettlecomb in Somersetshire,
bart. as heir to that family.


THE EDITOR.

The church and the tower of this parish are small, but distinguished
for their simple and neat appearance. They are situated with the
church town in a valley opening to the sea. In the church is a plain
memorial of Mr. Henry Davies, great-uncle to the editor, who died in
1737. Two of his relations, Mr. Davies father and son, were successive
rectors of this parish, through the bounty of the Trevelyan family.

And it may be a matter of some curiosity to insert the oath
administered a century ago to clergymen taking on themselves the
office of Dean Rural, or Decanus Episcopus. The oath is now omitted,
but the office itself has been uniformly preserved throughout the
Diocese of Exeter, and this useful institution is revived in various
parts of the kingdom.

The copy was found by the editor at Tredrea, his place in Cornwall,
among other old papers.

     TENOR JURAMENTI

     Decani Episcopi, in Comitatu Cornubiæ et Diœcesi Exoniensi.

     YOU GEORGE DAVIES shall swear, That you will well and truly
     execute the Office of DEAN RURAL, within your Deanery, for
     the Year ensuing. You shall diligently, in the year, visit
     all Churches and Chapels within your Deanery; and also all
     Parsonage and Vicarage Houses. You shall make true
     Presentments of such Defaults, as you shall find therein; as
     also the defect of Books, Ornaments, Utensils, and other
     Furniture belonging to each Church. You shall observe the
     Manners and Conversation of your Brethren the Clergy; whom
     (if obnoxious) You shall admonish; and, if thereupon they
     shall not reform, You shall detect, and present them to The
     Ordinary; that they may be proceeded against according to
     Law. You shall, either by yourself or deputy, faithfully
     execute, or cause to be executed, all such processes and
     mandates, as shall be sent you from your Ordinary, and make
     true Returns of the same.
                                So help you God.

  Sacramentum superscriptum præstabat Clericus prædictus
      GEORGIUS DAVIES de Parochia Sancti Perrani
          de Uthno in Diaconatu Penwith Rector.
  Tertio die mensis Decembris, Anno 1730.
            Coram me Ricardo W――[The name is defaced.]

Near the church used to flow a well, which, in addition to supplying
ample quantities of excellent water, gave responses to the most
interesting questions respecting life, deaths, marriages, &c. under
the superintendence of a Pythian hierophant (since peeth, pythe, is
Cornish for a well); but this oracle has ceased within the last twenty
years, after a manner fairly appropriate to the county; the working of
a mine having taken away all the water.

There are several good farm houses in the parish, formerly the
residences of gentlemen; but, excepting the church town, only one
place deserving the name of a village, which is Goldsithney, commonly
pronounced Gulzinney, lying on the road from Redruth to Marazion. In
this village was formerly a chapel dedicated to St. James, as Doctor
Borlase has ascertained from documents in the cathedral at Exeter. No
memory remains of this chapel having ever been used for divine
service; but within the editor’s recollection a small image might be
seen over the door, said by the inhabitants to be St. Perran; but if
the records consulted by Doctor Borlase are correct, more probably of
St. James.

Mr. Lysons mentions the fair which is annually holden here on the
fifth of August, St. James’s day, by the old style; and he also takes
notice of a tale, which the editor has heard a thousand times, of the
fair having been originally kept in the church town of Sithney, near
Helston, by virtue of a glove, which was annually displayed there,
till the men of Perran, by force or cunning, or by proposing to
exchange new gloves for old ones, bore off the talisman, and have by
its authority held the fair at Goldsithney ever since, paying one
shilling every year as a poor compensation to the party bereaved.

It is needless to add that this tale, as it is related, cannot be
true; but the names Sithney and Goldsithney, with the payment to the
churchwardens of the parish, seem to indicate some relation between
the parish and this village. The displaying of a glove at fairs is an
ancient and widely extended custom. Mr. Lysons says it is continued at
Chester. The editor has seen a large ornamented glove displayed on a
lofty pole over the Guild Hall at Exeter, during the fairs. Was the
glove used to receive the tolls, as shillings are still collected in
some courts of justice; or had it any reference to hand payments on
delivery, as is usual in fairs; or has it a more noble origin in
chivalry?

A cove is pointed out in Perran, where the ancestor of the Trevelyans
is said to have been borne on shore by the strength of his horse, from
the destruction of the Lionesse country, west of the Land’s End. The
Trevelyan family are too old, too honourable, and now too much
distinguished by science, for them to covet any addition of honour
through the medium of fabulous history.

It is recorded in the Saxon Chronicle, that in the year 1099, on St.
Martin’s day, there was so very high a tide, and the damage so great
in consequence, that men remembered not the like to have ever happened
before, and the same day was the first of the new moon.

Stow, who wrote his History of England about the year 1580, notices
the great tide of 1099, when he says, The sea brake in over the banks
of the Thames and other ryvers, drowning many towns, and much people,
with innumerable numbers of oxen and sheepe; at which time the lands
in Kent, that sometime belonged to Duke Godwyne, Earle of Kent, were
covered with sandes and drowned, which are to this day called Godwyne
Sandes. On the slender foundation of these alluvial catastrophies,
Florence of Worcester either invented, or with more than monkish
credulity, received the tale of a whole district being ingulphed; not
at some remote geological period, but in what may be considered as the
recent times of authentic history, after the existence of systematic
registers and records; a district, covered as he states, by a city,
and by a hundred and forty churches, with their accompanying villages,
farms, &c. an event that must have shaken the whole of Europe: and, to
increase the wonder, a gentleman accidentally on horseback, is carried
by this animal to the neighbouring shore of Whitsend Bay, or twenty
miles further off, to Perran, through a sea which had swallowed an
entire country, and from which the largest of modern vessels could not
by possibility have escaped. This idle tale, related by one writer
after another, has almost reached our own times. The editor remembers
a female relation of a former vicar of St. Erth, who, instructed by a
dream, prepared decoctions of various herbs, and repairing to the
Land’s End, poured them into the sea, with certain incantations,
expecting to see the Lionesse country rise immediately out of the
water, having all its inhabitants alive, notwithstanding their long
submersion. But

  Perchance some form was unobserved,
  Perchance in prayer or faith she swerved;

――no country appeared, and, although the love of marvellous events and
of tales exciting the passions, seems not to have diminished in recent
times, yet the editor is unaware of any subsequent attempt having been
made to rescue those unfortunate people from their protracted state of
suspended animation.

Perran Uthnow has to boast of but one modern addition to its
residences. About the year 1775, the late Mr. John Shakspeare of
Pendarves, built a house similar to the one previously erected by Mr.
Stephens at Tregorne, and gave it the name of the family with which he
was connected by his marriage.

About half a mile beyond this house, called Acton Castle, Cudden Point
projects into the sea, entirely covered with rock, and affording, in
many respects, the most pleasing view of any spot in the whole Bay.
From St. Michael’s Mount itself, the feature transcendent above all
others is lost; but from Cudden all the western objects are seen,
without including the long flat land of the Lizard.

Children from all the neighbourhood are in the habit of going to
Cudden Point at the low water of spring tides, with the hope of
finding a silver table, although they know not why. It appears,
however, that a Spanish vessel, having much bullion on board, was
wrecked there in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

The addition of Uthno made to this saint’s name, designates a manor
within the parish; there is also a manor called Lan Uthno, in St.
Erth, distinguished in former times as the parish of Lan Uthno; but
the editor has never been able to form any conjecture respecting the
meaning or the etymology of this word.

The parish feast is celebrated on the nearest Sunday to the fifth of
March, St. Perran’s Day.

  This parish measures 924 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815:          5530    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           200    0    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    506   |    626   |     786    |   1033
    giving an increase of somewhat more than 100 per cent. in 30 years.

This great increase of Population is owing to Perran having become a
mining parish, and to the cultivation of an extensive piece of waste
ground by individuals, constructing houses on portions of land not
exceeding one or two acres, granted on leases for their lives. A spot
on this formerly open ground, was called Chapel an Crouse, the chapel
and cross; but no record nor trace remains of any such an
establishment. Near the same place a bowling green existed about fifty
years ago, which is said to have been frequented fifty years prior to
that period, by all the gentlemen of the neighbourhood.

Present Rector, the Rev. W. M. Johnson, presented in 1815 by Sir J.
Trevelyan.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is composed of rocks belonging to the porphyritic series,
and which are similar to those of St. Hilary.




PERRAN ZABULOE, COMMONLY PERRANSAND, OR PERRAN IN THE SANDS.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN AND WHITAKER.

St. Piran lies in the hundred of Pider, and hath to the west St.
Agnes, to the north a very troublesome neighbour, the tempestuous
ocean, to the east St. Cuthbert and St. Newlin, to the south St. Allen
and Kenwin; and is so named from that famous Irish saint, to whose
sanctity, saith Mr. Camden, a silly childish writer has attributed the
finding provision for ten Irish kings and their armes, for eight days
together, with no more than three cows, as also bringing to life dead
hogs and dead men. It seems those kings were not very grateful to him,
for he was forced (as the same tradition saith) to swim over from
Ireland hither on a millstone. And saith Mr. Carew (fol. 58), if my
author, the legend, lie not, after that (like another Johannes de
Temporibus) he had lived two hundred and six years with perfect
health, [he] took his last rest in a Cornish parish, (viz. this) which
therethrough he endowed with his name. He is also looked upon as the
patron of the Tinners, who keep his feast on the 5th of March, and
tell twenty idle stories of him, much derogating from his sanctity.
Note, that on that day, 5th of March, there is a fair held near the
church, the profit of which belongs to the parish.

This church is a vicarage, and valued, together with St. Agnes, in the
King’s Book, £24. 9_s._ 0_d._ The patronage in the Dean and Chapter of
Exeter: the sheaf held by lease of the said Dean and Chapter, by
Thomas Tonkin, the writer hereof; the incumbent Mr. John Petvin.

All the lands in this parish, except the manor of Penhall and Halwyn,
are either part of or held from the manors of Tywarnhaile and
Tywarnhaile Tiers. I shall, therefore, first treat of these two
manors, and then of the other most memorable places, &c.

The manor of Tywarnhaile is so called from the situation of the once
principal place in it, and signifies a house on a river of salt water,
it being seated on the west side of Piran Bay, on a small river to
which the tide cometh every day.

This, and the manor of Tywarnhaile Tiers, were originally but one
manor; and the toll of tin is still amain between them, though all the
lands are divided, and the toll of all other metals goes with the
lands and owners of the several divisions; but the royalty is amain,
and they both hold courts cum visu franci plegii, &c.


THE MANOR OF TYWARNHAILE TIERS.

Sir Henry le Tyes, Lord Tyes, or (as Mr. Camden calls him) de Tiers,
was lord of the manor.

Not far from Tywarnhaile house is a small island, upon which are the
ruins of a chapel, called Chapel Angarder.

The manor of Penwortha, alias Penwartha, I take to signify the higher
head or hill, according to its situation in regard to the places
adjacent.

The ancient lords of this manor were the Pentires of Pentire in
Minvor, and of Pentewan in Mevagissey; the last of whom, Philip
Pentire, esq. left one daughter and heir, Jane, married to Thomas
Roscarrock, esq. which Jane died possessed of this manor, 5 Jac. I.
1607 (rent of Tywarnhaile-Tiers, penes me Thomas Tonkin). In Penwortha
village is an old chapel still standing, but profaned. This manor is
held from that of Tywarnhaile-Tiers, at £1. 2_s._ rent yearly.

―――― Roscarrock, esq. sold this manor in 16 Car. I. to Sir Francis
Vyvyan of Trelowarren, knt. in whose posterity it still continueth,
Sir Francis Vyvyan, bart. being the present lord thereof.

There have been small parcels of tin discovered in the north-west
parts of this manor, as also a vein of lead some few years since,
between the village of Penwortha and Lambrigan; but neither have
turned to any account.

Lambourne-Wigan, vulgo Lambrigan, is adjoining to Penwortha, and
commonly called by abbreviation Lambrigan. The meaning of Lambourn is
Lam or Lan, an inclosure, and Wigan, the same as Vycan, Vean, little;
the little Lambourn, to distinguish it from the other. This estate is
likewise held from the manor of Tywarnhaile-Tyes, and has passed
through the same hands as the manor of Penwortha, for two-thirds of
it, of which Sir Francis Vyvyan is now lord.

The other third, commonly called the Lower Town, one Bartholomew de
Trewenethick (Trenethick in St. Agnes) did possess one half of, in the
21st of Richard II.; which, together with Trevanythick, &c. he settled
on Joan, his daughter and heir, and John Hayme: which, by their
grand-daughter and heir, came to Luke Beauchamp of Chyton, and was, I
suppose, sold by Peter Beauchamp, to the ancestor of Francis Gregor of
Trewarthenick, who now possesseth it.

The other sixth, or half of the said third, came through several
hands, which I have not been able to get a true account of, to one
Thomas Carter, of Dartmouth in Devon, and he sold it 22 Car. I. to
John Tregea of St. Agnes, who haxing acquired a pretty estate by tin,
and taken a lease of Vyvyan’s two thirds, and Gregor’s sixth, settled
himself here, and began to build upon it; but, dying soon after, he
left it to finish to his son, Captain William Tregea; who having
married Mary, the daughter of Richard Cross of Bromfield, in Somerset,
esq. by whom he had no surviving issue, he soon after her death run
out a handsome estate, partly left him by his father, and partly of
his own acquiring; and in 1694 sold his right in this barton to
Michael Tonkin of Penwenick, gent.; after which he went into the army,
and was some time a captain in the late Lord Mohun’s regiment. He died
in London or near it in 1730, and gave for his arms, Azure, three
boar’s heads couped Argent. Michael Tonkin parted with it again in
1702, to the writer hereof, who had settled himself here on his
marriage in 1699, where he lived during his father’s life, being as
pleasant a seat as any in those parts, especially for all country
exercises of hunting, fishing, and fowling, the fine downs round it,
and the moors under, abounding in game.


THE MANOR OF LAMBOURN.

To the east of Lambrigan and contiguous, is Lambourn, which gives name
to this lordship, and which is held partly from Tywarnhaile, and
partly from Tywarnhaile Tyes. I take the name to be a softening of
_Lan Bron_, the hill inclosure, and so it is written in old deeds, and
the situation agrees with it.

This was the seat, and gave name to a considerable and knightly
family. Sir John de Lambron, temp. Hen. III. (Exeter Reg.) gave
Caerkief, in this parish, to the Dean and Chapter of Exeter, and they
still enjoy it. John de Lambron (Carew, fol. 51) was one of the men ad
arma, 17 Edw. II. Sir John de Lambron, (idem, fol. 52) I suppose his
son, was one of those who had £20 lands of rents or more, in the
county of Cornwall, 25 Edw. III. (as the former John is certified to
have had £40); and was summoned to attend the King at London, the next
Sunday after the Octave of St. John the Baptist, and to go with him in
the parts beyond sea. The next that I meet with, and the last of his
family, was William Lamborn (Heralds’ Office) who had only one
daughter and heir, married temp. Henry V. to Sir John Arundell of
Lanhearne, and called Amara, who brought the whole estate into that
family. Their arms were, Argent, a fess between two chevrons Sable.

Sir John Arundell gave this manor, inter alia, to their third son Sir
Renfry Arundell; who, by Joan the daughter and heir of Sir John
Colshull, knight, (killed at the battle of Agincourt, Oct. 25, 1415,)
had one son, Renfry, and one daughter, Elizabeth, married: 1. to
William Whittington, esq.; 2. to Edmund Stradling, esq. Renfry
Arundell had only one son, Sir Edmund Arundell, knight, who died
without issue, leaving his aunt Elizabeth his heir; who, by her second
husband Edmund Stradling, had only one daughter, Ann, married to Sir
John Danvers, knight. Between whom, and her eldest son (by her first
husband) John Whittington, esq. she divided her large estate, no less
than thirteen good manors of land.

This manor, by this division, falling into two hands, the mansion
house fell by degrees into decay, the stones of it were employed to
build several mean houses for tenants (for it is now a village), and
nothing remains but the chapel dedicated to St. Edmund, now too turned
to a dwelling, and part of the wall of the chapel yard, now a garden,
but formerly a burying place. There was likewise in it lately a font.
From all which I gather, it was a place of public worship, perhaps
sometimes served by the vicar (on account of the said donation of
Caerkief), by reason of its great distance from the church, being at
least three miles. [Caerkief was probably given by the Lambrons, for
leave to erect this chapel, which appears to have been a chapel of
ease to the parish church, but was erected for the use of the
Lambrons, their servants, and their tenants.] Thomas Whittington, esq.
grandson of William Whittington, and Elizabeth Arundell, died 38 Henry
VIII. (Dugdale’s Warwickshire, page 619), leaving six daughters and
coheiresses, whereof Blanche, the youngest, became the wife of John
St. Aubin of Clewance, esq.; and some of them, though all married,
dying without issue, her posterity became intituled to one fifth and
one sixtieth of all the Cornish lands; and this part of this manor is
in the possession of Sir John St. Aubyn, bart. The remaining part of
Whittington’s moiety, was sold by the other coheirs to ―――― Davy of
St. Cuthbert, gent. whose posterity enjoyed it till the latter end of
the reign of Charles II. when Davy sold his part to Humphry Borlace,
esq., and this went with a great part of his estate (as you may see in
Newlin) to Sir William Scawen, knight, whose nephew, Thomas Scawen, is
now lord thereof.

Danvers his moiety continued in his family till Queen Elizabeth’s
time, when Sir John Danvers of Dantesey in Wiltshire, knight,
dismembered and sold it in several parcels:――viz. 18 Elizabeth, 1577,
one half of a tenement (in which is St. Edmund’s chapel, and computed
at one sixth of the whole township of Lambourn,) to John Trevellans,
alias Nicholas, alias Williams; whose son, Nicholas Williams, alias
Trevellans, sold it, 13 Jac. I. to James Jenkyn Trekynin, gent. from
whose heirs it is come at last to Thomas Oats, and the writer thereof.
Another part of a tenement, being one fourth of the town of Lambourne,
[was sold by Sir John Danvers] much about the same time to ―――― Oats,
whose son John Oats sold it to the ancestor of Francis Gregor of
Trewarthenick, esq. who now enjoys it; and the remaining one twelfth
part (which maketh up his half of the said town), together with all
his claim to the one half of the lordship of Lambourne, and its
appurtenances, (Aut penes Authorem) to Edward Arundell of Lanherne,
esq. (being a younger brother of that family) 19 Elizabeth, 1577-8,
whose son, Thomas Arundell of St. Columb Major, esq. settled the same,
inter alia, 24 Car. I. 1648, on Richard Bluet, gent. a younger son of
Colan Bluet, of Little Colan, esq. on the marriage of his daughter
Elizabeth, to the said Richard Bluet; which said Richard Bluet, and
Elizabeth his wife, sold the said part to John Cordall, Jan. the 1st,
1650; and Ralph, the son of the said John Cordall, and John his son,
joined in a sale to the writer hereof, of the said premises, July 1,
1701: so that the present lords of the township of Lambourn, are Sir
John St. Aubin, and Thomas Scawen, esq., Francis Gregor, one fourth,
Thomas Tonkin, esq. one sixth, and Thomas Oats, one eighteenth. Where
note that the said Thomas Oats, a wealthy farmer in the said village,
(great-grandson to John Oats, who owned one fourth, now Mr. Gregor’s,)
I have reason to think (Aut. penes Authorem, at orig. pen. Thomas
Oats) descended from Otho Trefusis, who released his right in villa de
Trelisick (in St. Earth) to John Cornwall, 7 Junii, 28 Henry VI.; from
which Otho or Oats his posterity took the name of Oats, as was then
very common to do; and have, therefore, in my map of the hundred of
Pider, set the arms of Trefusis (which I think he may lawfully give)
over his name.

The said Richard Bluet and Elizabeth his wife, soon after, viz. 30
Maii, 1650, sold the half of this manor, and what remained indisposed
of, which was only one half of Millinoweth, alias Vellonnoweth [the
New Mill], and Nampetha, with Goynlase in St. Agnes, and a small part
in Fenton Vease [the outward well] and Collrun in this parish, with a
few high rents, unto Walter Vincent of Trigowethan, esq.; which, as
the rest of the Vincent’s estates, is gone (as you may see in
Mevagissey) to John Knight, who, Sir John St. Aubin, and Thomas
Scawen, esq. are the present lords of this manor.

In the commons belonging to the town of Lambourn, is a Barrow, called
_Creeg Mear_, the Great Burrow, which one Christopher Michell digging
into some years since, whilst I lived at Lambrigan, in hopes to find
stones for an adjoining hedge of his, came to an hollow place (as
usual in such), and found nine urns full of ashes; which, being
disappointed of what he sought for, for the barrow was all of earth,
except three or four rough stones which formed the hollow, he brutally
broke immediately to pieces; and when I expostulated with him about
it, and told him I would have paid him his charges, his reply was,
that whenever he met with any more, he would bring them to me, but
these were a parcel of old pitchers good for nothing. That these were
Danish, I believe there is no doubt. [They were British, as appears at
once, from the _Kist Vaen_ discovered within, and from the hinted
badness of the pottery.] But they were, I suppose, the ashes of some
chief commanders slain in battle, (for which the place is very fit, it
being a large open down) from the great number of them. [One barrow
cannot mark a battle.] And on a small hill just under this barrow,
[and, as under the barrow, bearing probably no relation to it,] is a
Danish encampment, called Castle Caer Dane, vulgo Castle Caer Don, i.
e. the Danes’ Camp, consisting of three intrenchments finished, and
another begun with an intent to surround the inner three, but not
completed; the whole containing about ―――― acres. And opposite to
this, about a bowshot, the river only running between, on another
hill, is another camp or castle, called Castle Kaerkief, castrum
simile, from Kyfel, similis, alike, alluding to Castle Caerdane. But
this is but just begun, and not finished in any part; from whence I
guess, that there were too different parties, of which the first
attacked the other, before they could finish their intrenchments: or
perhaps these attacked the first, having only thrown up a few
intrenchments for the present, on which a battle ensuing, these were
the ashes of the chief men that fell in it. And this being called
Creeg Mear, the Great Barrow, seems to carry a more special regard
with it. This Castle Caerkief is on the estate which the forementioned
Sir John de Lambron gave to the church at Exeter, and no doubt had its
name from this fortification.

[These opposed camps have no other pretence to a Danish origin, than
what a Cornish critic should be ashamed to own, the mere coincidence
in sound of Din or Dines with Danish. This is the sole foundation for
all the Danish camps, with which the antiquarian oscitancy of Cornwall
has replenished the county. All built upon hills, they naturally take
the name of Din, Dinas, or Don, in Cornish, to denote their site; and
while the common people, unseduced by the surmises of literature,
still retain the name in its original purity, the scholars come
forward and mould it to their own follies. We see this very livelily
in the name of the former of these two camps, which the common people
call Caer _Don_, but the critic writes it Caer _Dane_, and then
interprets into the Danes’ camp, but it signifies only the hill
fortress. Opposed to this, on another hill, and beyond a rivulet, is
another camp, which is called Caerkief, the companion or mate of the
other. Kyfel, says Mr. Tonkin, signifying similar or like in Cornish,
Kyvedk (C.) being a fellow, or colleague, Kyvadhas (C.) a companion,
and Kuf (C.) a wife, Cyfaill, Cyfailt (W.) a friend, a companion, and
Cyfalle, (W.) a husband or wife, a partner, a fit match. The very
opposition of the camps is thus denoted in the name. But then Caer Don
is considered as the principal, and Caer Kief has its appellation from
its relation to that. They are a British and a Roman camp. The Roman
appears from the smallness, lying “on a small hill,” from the finished
state of its intrenchments, from its having no less than three, and
from its having even a fourth begun, to encircle all. These marks of
military attention and of patient industry, all unite to point it out
decisively for a Roman one. Nor has the other a signature less lively
of its British origin; it is “but just begun, and not finished in any
part.” The Romans, probably seeing the Britons begin to fortify their
ground, desisted from their fourth work, marched out of their own
camp, and attacked the Britons in theirs, before they could form it;
and in this view of the camps, the barrow, which is over the Roman,
and not between it and the British, could have no reference to either,
and was only the tomb of some family residing in the vale below.
WHITAKER.]

Next to Lambourne, and within the manor, which extends itself over
several parishes, (Treluddro in Newlyn being held from it) is a great
village called Callestock Veor, or the Great Callestock, to
distinguish it from another in this parish, which is by interpretation
hard broad oak, (though stock properly signifies the stem or stock of
a tree,) which formerly grew here in great abundance, though there are
now but few remaining. Here lately lived a younger branch of the
Tebbots, vulgo Tippets, of St. Wen; the last of which, John Tippet,
had an estate of £100 per annum, partly fee, partly lease, which he
chiefly spent in law, and was in his old age, more than 90, maintained
by the parish: he died about 1712. As likewise, as appears by the
confirmed rate 1612, one Mr. Torr; but I can at present say no more of
him for want of better information.

There are in the commons of this village some remaining intrenchments,
but not worthy of notice. But at a place, also within this manor,
about three quarters of a mile from it, called _Tresawsen_, alias
_Bosawsen_, i. e. the English town or dwelling, on the top of the hill
to the south of the village, is a double Danish intrenchment, of which
the outer one has been almost filled up by often ploughing, but the
inner one is very entire, and they both contain about an acre of land.
It hath no particular name that I know of, but is within sight of
Castle Caer Dane, from which it is distant about two miles. And from
this you see another in St. Allen, about the same distance from this;
vide St. Allen. [Tresawen, alias Bosawsen, from Tre and Boss (C.) a
house, and Saisson, Saxon, or English, is evidently from its name, not
Danish, but Saxon. It is a Saxon fort, constructed on the reduction of
the West of Cornwall by Athelstan, and maintained as a bridle and a
curb upon the natives; and it seems to mark the advance of the Saxon
arms from Camelford, where Egbert gained his great victory over the
Cornish, to St. Burien’s, from which Athelstan probably embarked for,
and at which he certainly landed on his return from reducing the
Scilly Isles.]

Having taken notice of the most remarkable things in this manor (for I
have spoken of the three barrows and four barrows in Kenwin, only I
forgot to mention, that in the middle of Callestock stood a chapel, of
which the very ruins are now scarce visible; and that in Caerkief,
near the highway to Mitchell, is a fair arched well called Fenton
Berran, i. e. St. Piran’s Well,) I come next to

The Manor of Fenton Gymps, which takes its name from its capital
place, Fenton Gymps Veor, or the Great Fenton Gymps; which adjunct,
Gymps, is a contraction of _Thesympes_, not intermitting, [and means]
the well that always flows, as not freezing in winter, or dying
[drying] in the summer. And such a one there is in the town place of
the manor house. [The aim of the etymon is very right here, I believe;
but the manner in which it is directed is wrong. Adjoined to the word
Fenton, and explained by the existing reality, _Gymps_ assuredly means
what Mr. Tonkin says, not intermitting, but always flowing. But how
does _Gymps_ signify this? That it is a contraction of _thesympes_ can
hardly be allowed. The contraction is too violent. _Thesympes_ also
signifies nothing but _immediately_ in Borlase, which can have no
association with the general idea. Whence then shall we derive the
word? We have it without any derivation, and without any contraction,
in Kympez (C.) always. And Dr. Pryce I since find so derives the
word.] This gave name to an ancient race of gentlemen. John de
Fentongemps (Aut. pen. Author.) lived here 21 Edward I. [Edward III.]
1346. John Fentongymps, “D’nus et hæres de Fentongympys,” grants to
John, the son of Ralph de Fentongympys, all his messuages lands, &c.
in Fentongympis, and elsewhere, in the county of Cornwall; dated the
Feast of the Purification, 12 Henry IV. John Fentongemps of the parish
of Pirran in Treth (the sand) grants to John, the son of Thomas
Martin, a lease for term of years of Marghessen-foos (Marasan vose) in
the said parish, dated at Marghessen-foos, in festo Petri et Pauli, 3
Henry VI.

Note. That Marghessen-foos, or Marasan-vose, i. e. the Maids’ Market,
is a village in the manor of Fenton-gymps in Piran sands, but why so
named I cannot guess, except that, being in the great road to
Mitchell, the maids came there to offer themselves in service, a
custom taken notice of, particularly by Dr. Plot, Nat. Hist. of Oxf.
c. 8, 29, p. 208; but not (that I know of) practised now anywhere in
this county. [Mr. Tonkin has here misled himself by an etymon forced
and false. He considers foos or vose as Môz a maid. But the name is
merely this, Marghes or Marhas an Fôs or Vôs, the market on the ditch
or trench. Fos, indeed, Borlase interprets wall, and has this very
appellation, Marhas an Fôs, which he renders the market on wall,
obviously without any sense. But under Vôs he recollects himself――“Vôs
for fôs;” he then says, “a ditch, wall, or fence,” as Penvôs, head of
the trench, _Marhas an Vos, the market on the foss_.” Dr. Pryce adopts
both these etymons in his vocabulary, and prefers the former in his
names very injudiciously. From this name the village appears to have
been formerly a market town. The market was perhaps held on some
boundary ditch, and took its name from it; but in all probability, as
“being in the great road to Mitchell,” it lay upon a Roman road,
which, like the great road from Lincolnshire to Bath, and through
Somersetshire to the south or west, bore the appellation of foss; and
very probably the Foss itself is continued by Stratton, Camelford,
Wadebridge, and St. Columb, direct by Newlyn into Piran parish,
Lamburn, Lambrigan, Marghessan-fos, and White Street there. See the
map in Borlase. WHITAKER.]

William Pennalyky releases to John Fyntengympys all his claim, &c. in
Fyntengympys Veor, Fyntengympys Vyan [little Fyntengympys],
Marhasen-fos, Rekellythye, Chyendur, Paddestock, and Chywarton, “dat.
apud Truro Burg. 14 Julii, 24 Henry VI.” Which John Fentongympys had
(I suppose) only one daughter and heir, Joan (for so she is said to be
in a deed from John Laurens, cler. and Edmund Santy, capell.), to her
of a tenement in Fentongympys Vyan, and the heirs which Benedict, the
son of John Bernard of Bodmyn, has or shall beget on the body of the
said Joan, “dat. apud Truru Burgh,” the day before the feast of
Bartholomew, 24 Hen. VI. Which Joan, I guess, by a deed bearing date 8
Henry VII. was afterwards married to John Penrose, in which he and
Richard Penrose (I suppose his second son) release to William Penrose,
his son and heir, and Isabel, the daughter and heir of John Hayme, an
annuity of twenty shillings, lately granted to them by the said
William, and issuing out of Fentengympys Veor, Fentengympys Bian,
Chyandouer, Marghassan-fos, and Chywarton. The next that I find
possessed of any right here, are Richard Penwarne, esq. and William
Wayte of Trewenethick, gent. Wayte sells his part to Henry Dotson of
Roskymer in Mawgan Meneg, gent. (which said Henry had an estate before
in Fentongymps, &c. but by what right it doth not appear,) the 4th and
5th of Philip and Mary 1558; by which means Penwarne and Dotson had
each a moiety of this manor. Sir John Arundell of Tolverne, knight,
John Dotson of Reskymer, gent. (whose trustee I take Arundell to have
been[10]) convey their half to John Code of St. Wen, gent. 20 9^{ber}, 31
Elizabeth.

John Code and his brethren sell the same, 10 Dec. 40 Eliz. to John
Carter of St. Columb Major, gent. Richard Penwarne of Penwarne in
Mawnan, esq. sells the other half to the said John Carter, 20 Jan. 38
Eliz.

In which family of Carter this manor continued till 165――; when his
grandson, Richard Carter, esq. sold it to John Cleather, senior, gent.
whose posterity lived here some time in good repute. And in the year
1691, his grandson Samuel Cleather, gent. together with some lands in
the manor of Lambourn, sold it for £1500, to Hugh Tonkin, esq. and the
writer hereof is at present lord of it. Mr. Cleather gave, in a field
Vert, a chevron Or, between three clethes (swords in Cornish,) the
blades Proper, the pommels of the Second.

Within this manor is Chywarton (vulgo Chyton) i. e. a house on a hill.
[Tshei, Chi, a house in Cornish, War upon, and Don, a hill.] This was
the seat in lease (though John Resogan, senior, bought the fee about
the year 169――, of the heirs of John Lord Arundell of Trerice) of a
branch of the Resogans, of St. Stephen’s in Brannel. Here lived in
Queen Elizabeth’s time, Bennet Resogan, gent.

But this and a pretty little estate, in all about £100 per annum, was
consumed by a dependant of his, John Resogan, jun. who lived at an
estate called Callestock-Ruol, i. e. Cullistock always adjoining to
this. [This etymon is so unmeaning that the mind rejects it at once. A
good one also presents itself. Ruy (C.) is a prince or king, and Ryel
(C.) is royal. The adjunct, therefore, denotes the mansion to be
royal, or one of the many mansions which the Kings of Cornwall had
upon their demesnes.] Chyton he sold to John Andrew of Trevellance in
this parish, in the year 1724.

I must go backwards now, and come to the manor of Trevellance, alias
Pencaranowe, id est, Pen-Carnow, the hill of rocks.

Trevellance, i. e. the dwelling in the Mill Valley (alluding to
Mellingy Mill in its neighbourhood, from whence another estate under
the said mill is called Nancemellin, i. e. to the mill valley.) [N.B.
Mr. Tonkin apparently forms Trevellance of Tre Melin Nance, three
words that could never by any contraction be shrunk within the compass
of it. The name appears below to be Trefelens; and Trevelin is the
house of the mill.] was the dwelling house of Mr. William Trefelens
(so writ by the error [when it appears below to be no error] of the
scribe) which, 12 Henry VIII. he settled by the name of Trefelens,
Penkaranowe, Trevelles, Polleowe, Coysgarne, the rights and services
in Nampara, and the rents and services in Runewartha, on Ralph John,
cler.

He sold it to William Tregea of St. Agnes; who in 16…, was forced to
sell it to pay his debts, to John Thomas in 1694; whose father ――――
Thomas, was of the Thomases [a later hand has added, of Glamorganshire
in Wales; he was the younger son of Howel Thomas of Glamorganshire, by
―――― the daughter of Sir Robert Burt of Pembrokeshire]; whose son John
Thomas, gent. [he died in 1733, and his son Andrew Thomas, gent. hath
the whole estate,] having married Jane, [in a later hand Anne,] the
only surviving daughter and heir of Mr. John Andrew of Trewellance,
will, after his decease, have in conjunction with his own, a pretty
estate in this parish. Mr. Thomas’s arms are [N.B. in a later hand,
Gules, a chevron and canton Ermine.]

To the east of Penkaranowe, and joining with it, is Reenwartha, the
higher hill, to distinguish it from another called Reen Wollas, the
Lower Hill [Rhyn (W.) a mountain or promontory, Ryn (C.) a bill, a
nose, Rynen (C.) a hillock. Penryn in Cornwall, a projecting hill on
which the town of that name is built, and Penrhyn, the most common
word in Wales for a promontory; Wartha (C.) on high, above; and
Wollos, Wolas (C.) below.] Between which two Penkaranowe lies. This
was sold by the said R. Haweis to Cottey, whose grandson, Christopher
Cottey, gent. now enjoys it; but one fifth part of it distinct from
the other, as also one fifth part of Hendrawna and Nampara (all within
the manor) were the lands of inheritance of Hugh Jackman, gent.; and
by him sold about the year 1670, to Walter Vincent of Truro, esq. who
(Aut. pen. Author.) Feb. 22, 1678, conveyed them to John Catcher of
St. Clement’s, reserving to himself the tin and royalty. From Catcher
they came to Henry Gregor of Truro, merchant, whose grandson, Samuel
Ennys, esq. now enjoys them.

After the said Reginald Haweis had dismembered it thus, he sold the
lordship and the little that was left, one fifth of Trevelles in St.
Agnes, and some trifle more, to the said Walter Vincent, which is
gone, with the rest of the estate, to Mr. Knight.

This manor, and the several estates therein, are held partly from
Tywarnhaile, and partly from Tywarnhaile Tiers.

Note, that between Reen Wollas and Trevellance runs a fine rivulet,
which in the winter season overflowing its banks, and making the
passage over it very dangerous, occasioned a county bridge of two
arches of stone, and a long causeway, with a smaller arch at the
eastern end of it, to be constructed in 1708, chiefly procured by the
writer hereof (several people having been drowned here, it being a
great thoroughfare), who was at the general sessions appointed
treasurer for the building it; this is called Melingybridge, from the
adjacent village of Melingay, i. e. the mill in the river [that is,
the water mill,] under which are fine moors for fowling and fishing,
abounding with all sorts of wild fowls, and peal, salmon, shots, eels,
and flounders.


THE MANOR OF ST. PIRAN

Lyeth joining to the east, with Penkaranowe and Reen Wartha between
them, and the church lands of St. Piran, from whom it takes its name.

This is now wholly destroyed by the sands, but was once the seat of a
family of the same name: by a daughter of one of which it came to the
Rendalls of Pelint; and by Elizabeth, the only daughter and heir of
Walter Rendall of Lostwithiel, to her husband, Henry Vincent of
Tresimple, whose son Walter Vincent, esq. claimed a free warren here
under the Duke of Cornwall. It hath some good tin works in it, but so
chargeable, by reason of the depth of sand, that they do not turn to
much account, and are gone with the rest of the estate as above. This
manor is in Carew, fol. 46, rated at three acres Cornish, 12 Edward I.

At the back side of this manor, to the south, is a large down or
wastrell.

[N. B. here a page 460 e. is lost; and since I saw it last, I think.
But from the marginal note, “Piran Round,” it contained a description
of that Cornish amphitheatre.]


THE EDITOR.

It is rather a curious circumstance that the word Zabuloe added to
Perran, for the distinction of this parish, is not derived from the
Celtic, but through the French sable from sabulum, a word frequently
used by Pliny as indicative of sand or gravel.

Unfortunately, some leaves are wanting from Mr. Tonkin’s manuscript of
this parish, so that no account is found in it, either of the
amphitheatre, or of the consecrated well which belongs to Perran
Zabuloe; although, by a singular anomaly, the Perran in Kerrier bears
the name as an addition, at least in common parlance. Doctor Borlase
has given a description and a plan of this curious Round, as it is
usually called, in his work on the Natural History of Cornwall,
printed at Oxford in 1758, where, at p. 298, he says:――“The area of
the amphitheatre is perfectly level, and about one hundred and thirty
feet in diameter. The benches, seven in number, rise eight feet from
the area. The top of the rampart is seven feet wide; it slopes
externally into a foss, which rises by another slope to the level of
the country. There is a circular pit nearly in the centre, thirteen
feet in diameter, and three feet deep, the sides also sloping. Half
way down is a bench of turf, so formed as to reduce the bottom to an
ellipsis; and a shallow trench four feet six inches wide, and one foot
deep, runs in an easterly direction to the nearest part of the circle,
where it terminates in a semi-oval cavity extending eleven feet from
north to south, and nine feet from east to west, making a breach in
the benches.”

This and other similar works in Cornwall, are believed to have
accommodated great numbers of spectators when the Guary Mir, or
miracle plays, were performed. One of them, mentioned by Doctor
Borlase, “The Creation of the World,” with Mr. Keigwyn’s Translation,
the editor of this work has given to the public, and also the Metrical
History of the Passion of our Saviour on Mount Calvary.

The well consecrated by St. Perran is not understood to possess any
peculiar qualities, but up to the present time its waters, accompanied
by the ceremony of passing children through the cleft of a rock on the
sea shore, are believed to cure various diseases, and particularly the
rickets.

The encroachments of the sand have caused no less than three churches
to be built after considerable intervals of time in this parish. The
last was commenced in 1804; and in this year (1835) a building has
been discovered more ancient than the first of the churches, and not
improbably the oratory of St. Perran himself.

The length of this chapel within the walls is 25 feet, without 30
feet; the breadth within 12½ feet, and the height of the walls the
same.

At the eastern end is a neat altar of stone covered with lime, four
feet long by two and a half feet wide, and three feet high. Eight
inches above the centre of the altar is a recess in the wall, where
probably stood a crucifix; and on the north side of the altar is a
small doorway through which the priest may have entered. Out of the
whole length the chancel extended exactly six feet. In the centre of
what may be termed the nave, in the south wall, occurs a round-arched
doorway, highly ornamented. The building is however without any trace
of window, and there is only one small opening, apparently, for the
admission of air.

The discovery has excited much curiosity throughout the neighbourhood,
which has unfortunately manifested itself by the demolition of every
thing curious in this little oratory, to be borne away as relics.

Very little is known concerning the saint who has given his name to
the three Perrans. He is however held in great veneration, and
esteemed the patron of all Cornwall, or at least of the mining
district. By an anachronism of fifteen hundred years or more, he was
considered as the person who first found tin; and this conviction
induced the miners to celebrate his day (the fifth of March) with so
much hilarity, that any one unable to guide himself along the road,
has received the appellation of a Perraner; and that again, has been
most unjustly reflected as a habit on the saint.

It may here be worthy of remark, that, as the miners impute the
discovery of tin to St. Perran, so they ascribe its reduction from the
ore, in a large way, to an imaginary personage, Saint Chiwidden; but
chi-wadden is the white house, and must therefore mean a smelting or
blowing house, where the black ore of tin is converted into a white
metal.

In the Lives of the Saints, published by Doctor Butler, where all
miraculous adventures, like swimming on millstones, are carefully
omitted, the following history is given of our saint.

     “St. Kiaran or Kenerin, Bishop and Confessor, called by the
     Britons, Piran or Perron.

     “Among the Irish saints, who were somewhat older than St.
     Patrick, the first and most celebrated is St. Kiaran, whom
     the Irish style the first-born of their saints. According to
     some, he was a native of the county of Ossory, according to
     others, of Cork. Usher places his birth about the year 352.
     Having received some imperfect information about the
     Christian faith, at thirty years of age, he took a journey
     to Rome, that he might be instructed in its heavenly
     doctrine, and learn faithfully to practice its precepts. He
     was accompanied home by four holy clerks, who were all
     afterwards bishops; their names are Lugacius, Columban,
     Lugad, and Cassan.

     “The Irish writers suppose him to have been ordained Bishop
     at Rome; but what John of Tinmouth affirms seems far more
     probable, that he was one of the twelve whom St. Patrick
     consecrated Bishops in Ireland, to assist him in planting
     the Gospel in that island. For his residence he built
     himself a cell in a place encompassed with woods, near the
     water of Fueran, which soon grew into a numerous monastery.
     A town was afterwards built there, called Saigar, now from
     the saint Sîer Keran. Here he converted to the faith his
     family, and his whole clan, which was that of the Osraigs,
     with many others. Having given the religious veil to his
     mother, whose name was Lidain, he appointed her a cell or
     monastery near his own, called by the Irish Ceall Lidain. In
     his old age, being desirous to  prepare himself for his
     passage to eternity in close retirement, he passed into
     Cornwall, where he led an eremitical life, near the Severn
     sea, fifteen miles from Padstow. Certain disciples joined
     him, and by his words and example, formed themselves to a
     true spirit of Christian piety and humility. In this place
     he closed his mortal pilgrimage by a happy death. A town
     upon the spot is to this day called from him St. Piran’s in
     the Sands; and a church is there dedicated to God in his
     memory, where was formerly a sanctuary near St. Mogun’s
     church, upon St. Mogun’s Creek.[11] See John of Tinmouth,
     Usher, &c. collected by Henschenius; also Leland’s
     Collectanea, published by Hearne, tom. III. pp. 10 and 174.”

It seems to be much more probable, that St. Perran took an active part
with the Irish missionaries, perhaps as their chief, since he obtained
such great celebrity in this county, than, according to Doctor Butler,
that he should have come over to Cornwall in extreme old age, and have
done his utmost to render the remaining years of his life utterly
useless to the service of his Maker or to mankind. A white cross on a
black ground was formerly the banner of St. Perran, and the standard
of Cornwall; probably with some allusion to the black ore and the
white metal of tin. Capgrave says that St. Perran attained an age
exceeding two hundred years.

In the new edition of Dugdale’s Monasticon, vol. VI. p. 1449, an
account is given of a college supposed to have been here; but,
excepting that the church was given by King Henry the First to the
Bishop and Church of Exeter, who still enjoy the great tithes and the
advowson of the vicarage, it clearly refers to the college dedicated
to St. Perran in the parish of Keverne. The shrine of St. Perran,
however, containing his head and other relics, was at this place;
Lysons quotes a deed in the registry of Exeter, showing the great
resort of pilgrims hither in 1485; and in the will of Sir John
Arundell 1433, occurs this bequest: “Item lego ad usum parochie S’c’i
Pyerani in Zabulo ad claudendum capud S. Pierani honorificè et meliori
modo quo sciunt xls.[12]”

The great tithes of this parish have long been held on lease for lives
under the Dean and Chapter of Exeter, by the family of Enys of Enys.
The present incumbent is the Rev. John Buller, instituted in 1818, who
is also vicar of St. Just in Penwith, son of Mr. Edward Buller of
Portlooe, and brother of the judge.

Chiverton, having belonged to the Arundells, was sold in 1703 to John
Rosogan, esq. In 1724 it was again sold to Mr. John Andrew of
Trevellance, maternal great-grandfather to the late John Thomas, esq.
an eminent attorney, and afterwards Vice Warden of the Stannaries,
where Mr. Thomas built an excellent house with extensive gardens and
plantations; this place has descended to his only daughter, who
married William Peter, esq. of Haslyn, member for Bodmin in the
Parliament of 1832. They have still further improved the place, and
made it their chief residence.

  Perran Zabuloe measures 9499 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          3,385    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           851   14    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {   1389   |   1527   |    1702    |   2793
    giving an increase of 101 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The greater part of this parish belongs to the calcareous series, its
rocks resembling those of Cubert, Newlyn, and St. Allen; but the
extreme western, adjoining to St. Agnes, is composed of the
porphyritic series, being a continuation of that of the latter parish.


     [10] Arundel had a mortgage from Dotson.

     [11] This refers to the college in the parish of St. Keverne
     near Mawgan in Kerrier.

     [12] Collectanea Topogr. et Geneal. vol. iii. p. 392.




LITTLE PETHERICK.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Little Petheric, or St. Petroc Minor, in the hundred of Pider, hath to
the west St. Ervan, to the north Padstow and the river Alan, to the
east St. Breock, and to the south St. Issy.

This parish taking its name from the same saint as Padstow, and
joining with it, prove that it should be called Petroc Stow or Padstow
Minor.

This is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book at £6. 6_s._ 8_d._ The
patronage Sir William Morice. The incumbent Mr. John Day. In the Tax.
Benef. 20th Edward the First, this church, by the name of St.
Nansantan, was valued at thirty shillings, having never been
appropriated.


THE EDITOR.

There is very little in this parish to require attention. The advowson
has fallen to the Molesworth share of the Morice property.

The church and the small church town are situated in a deep valley,
and altogether form a pleasing group of objects as they are approached
on one of the roads leading to Padstow. Tregonnen is the only other
village.

This part of Cornwall abounded with chapels, probably in consequence
of the monastic institutions, so that even this small parish had one
near the church, dedicated, Mr. Lysons says, to St. Ide or Ida, a
pious widow who discharged her duties in this life according to the
opinions entertained in those times; by bestowing her income, arising
as it must have done, from sources of active industry, in premiums for
idleness and vice, and by immuring herself in a cell built within the
inclosure of a church. Her husband is said to have been a favourite of
Charlemagne; and her death is supposed to have taken place about three
years after that of the founder of the French empire. At a farm called
Trevilan traces remain of another chapel.

Mr. Lysons says, that this parish was formerly called Nassington or
Naffeton.

  Little Petherick measures 1315 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1357    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            86    2    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    126   |    134   |     217    |    224
    giving an increase of 78 per cent. very nearly in 30 years.
  The Rev. Richard Lyne died Rector of this parish in 1834; and was
    succeeded by the Rev. Darell Stephens, presented by Sir W.
    Molesworth, Bart.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The geology of this parish is the same as that of the adjacent
parishes of St. Issey, St. Ervan, and St. Eval.




SOUTH PETHERWIN OR PEDERWIN.


HALS.

The manuscript relative to this parish is lost.


TONKIN AND WHITAKER.

South Pederwin is in the hundred of East, and is bounded to the west
by Trewenn, Altarnun, and Lewanick, to the north by St. Stephen, to
the east by St. Thomas, Lanceston, and Lawhitton, to the south by
Lezant.

This parish takes its name [from], and is dedicated to, St. Paternus,
who was descended from an ancient family in Armorica, from whence he
sailed into Ireland, and living there some time incognito, went from
thence into Wales; here his piety and conduct raised him such an
interest that the princes of that country, then at variance, laid down
their arms at his application. Camden in Cardiganshire tells us, that
St. Patern resided there, and had a church there dedicated to his
memory, called Llan Badern Vaur, the church of St. Patern the Great.

St. Patern hath likewise two churches here and in Devon dedicated to
him, this and North Pederwyn; and having done great service to
religion in Wales, he returned into his native country of Armorica, at
the instance of his countrymen, where he was received with great
respect by Sampson the younger, Archbishop of Dole. The French Bretons
keep three holidays in honour of his memory, one upon the day he
procured peace among the Welsh princes, the second upon his going into
orders, and the third upon the anniversary of his death, which
happened about the year 540, and is, I suppose, the day on which the
church celebrates his memory, viz. Nov. the 12th.

In anno 1291, 20th Edward I. (Tax. Benef.) the rectory of this church
was valued at £6, and was then appropriated to the priory of St.
German’s, as it is now to the University of Oxford; and the vicarage
at £40. The prior of St. German’s did also receive out of the said
vicarage a pension of 13_s._ 4_d._


THE EDITOR.

There is but little to add respecting this parish, which is one of the
very few livings held by the University of Oxford, only five in all,
with one lectureship.

The church is spacious, and contains several monuments. It stands with
a lofty tower on an elevated station; and, being quite surrounded by
trees, the whole is conspicuous and beautiful.

There are some annual fairs kept in the church town; and the parish
has three other villages, Trecroogo, Tregallen, and Trethevy.

Several of the farms were in former times the property and the
residences of small gentlemen.

The principal places are,

Trebersey, where resided the family of Gedy, of whom Richard Gedy was
Sheriff of Cornwall in the year 1623, the 21st of King James the
First. His daughter and heiress became the wife of Sir John Eliot the
celebrated patriot, and in their descendants the property remained
till the decease of Mr. John Eliot, about thirty years ago. This
gentleman, who was Sheriff in 1776, devised his property to Mr.
William Eliot, of Port Eliot, his distant relation. Mr. Eliot took
down the old house, and built a large and handsome mansion at some
little distance from the former; but, succeeding to Port Eliot and the
family property, on the death of his elder brother, he disposed of
Trebersey to David Howell, Esq. who has made it his residence.

The Editor has grounds for believing that his father, the Rev. Edward
Giddy, was a descendant in the fourth degree, from a nephew of Mr.
Richard Gedy of Trebersey, who settled in the West of Cornwall.

Tresmarrow, a seat of the Pipers, previously to their occupying
Madford, adjoining to Launceston, came with the heiress of that
family, to a younger son of Sir Richard Vyvyan of Trelowarren; their
son, Mr. Philip Vyvyan, having married Mary, the daughter of Sheldon
Walter, Esq. acquired Tremeal in the same parish, where he resided.
Mr. Vyvyan left two sons and a daughter: Vvol, the eldest, succeeded
to the family property, on the decease of his father’s first cousin,
the Rev. Sir Carew Vyvyan. The second son married, but died without a
family. The daughter, Harriot, married Stephen Luke, Esq. M.D.; and on
the sale and division of Mr. Philip Vyvyan’s landed property, Dr. Luke
acquired Tresmarrow, which is now become a farm house.

Tremeal has been noticed above. Mr. Philip Vyvyan either rebuilt or
greatly improved the house. After his decease, it was sold to Mr.
Archer, brother to Mr. Archer of Trelaske, who resided here for some
time: but, experiencing one of the most severe afflictions to which
human nature is exposed, by losing the dearest of all friends, he
reduced the house to a fit dwelling for one who should occupy the
farm, and abandoned a place deprived of all its attractions and of all
its charms.

A very different picture is presented to the mind by a monumental
inscription in the churchyard, which has been frequently copied on
account of its strange absurdity.

  Beneath this stone Humphry and Jone
    Together rest in peace:
  Living, indeed――they disagreed,
    Now here all quarrels cease.

  South Petherwin measures 4710 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           5005    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           626   15    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    699   |    733   |     914    |    988
    giving an increase of 41 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. R. S. Stevens, presented by the University
    of Oxford in 1824.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish is entirely situated on rocks of the calcareous series,
consisting of a blue argillaceous slate, more or less fissile, of
lamillar calcareous schist, and black limestone; so that its
geological composition is in all respects similar to what is found in
the adjoining parishes of Launceston, Lawhitton, and Lezant.




PHILLACK.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN AND WHITAKER.

Phillack is situate in the hundred of Penwith, and hath to the west
Haile and St. Ives Bay, to the north Gwythian, to the east Gwyniar, to
the south St. Earth.

This parish takes its name from a female Saint, to whom the church is
dedicated, Sancta Felicitas, by corruption Phillack. [Query, who or
whence was she? I apprehend the Saint to be the same with that of
Philly or Philleigh in the next article.]

It is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book at £45. 10_s._ 8_d._ The
patronage in the heirs of Sir John Arundell of Lanherne. The incumbent
Mr. Edward Collins, who succeeded Mr. Jasper Philips.

In anno 1291, 20 Edward I. this church was valued at (Tax. Benef.) £6.
8_s._ 4_d._ having never been appropriated.


THE EDITOR.

The church is neat but small, and very inadequate to the increased
number of inhabitants in the parish: the tower, like most others in
this part of Cornwall, is of granite. Phillack stands near the eastern
branch of Hayle River, and towards the sea, from whence comminuted
shell sand is continually brought inland by the wind, threatening to
overwhelm the whole village. Notice has been taken under Lelant of
this ordinary incroachment of the sand, and of the inundations which
have occurred at different periods remote from each other. Very
considerable parts of Phillack, and of Gwithian the adjoining parish,
are covered with sand formed into hillocks of twenty or thirty feet
high, representing in miniature one of the most uneven districts that
can any where be found. Under these are frequently discovered fences,
inclosures, and the walls of houses; and the high valuation of the
living in Wolsey’s Survey seems to prove that much land must have been
covered with sand since that time, and converted into what is named
_Towan_.

Notwithstanding this loss, however great it may have been, the parish
has flourished in recent times, far beyond all former example or
expectation, by the extension of trade, and by the consequent
improvement of the harbour. The progress in both has been greatly
accelerated by the successful working of various mines in the
immediate neighbourhood; but the first step was taken when a copper
smelting establishment was made there, soon after the middle of the
last century.

An opinion, or rather a feeling, had prevailed in Cornwall that the
copper ores should be smelted at home, and not sent to the opposite
coast of Wales. Nothing could be more erroneous. About three times the
quantity of coal is required to smelt any given weight of the copper
ore; and the importation of coal from Swansea being very large, the
conveyance of copper ore there produced alternate cargos. The whole
scheme seems to have originated in mistaken analogies drawn from
ordinary operations.

A plan so injudicious and adopted without estimate or consideration
must have failed, and would have done so at once, but for the
counteracting power of individual ability, in the person of Mr. John
Edwards; a young man of Ludyan, who had been recommended at a very
early age, to some situation requiring talent, by our celebrated
historian Doctor William Borlase. Mr. Edwards speedily acquired the
entire management and direction of the whole concern, which soon
extended itself to the importation of coal, timber, limestone, iron,
&c. for the supply of the neighbourhood; and by the unwearied exertion
of his superior genius, the business continued with success up to the
period of his decease in Jan. 1807.

Mr. Edwards may be reckoned among the distinguished persons whom
Cornwall has produced, equal in number at the least, as we flatter
ourselves, with those of any similar district. He acquired extensive
general knowledge, and obtained an ascendancy over most persons on all
occasions. Mr. Edwards had a numerous family, but only two have
married: his eldest daughter to Mr. John Tippett; and their son has
succeeded to the large property of Mr. Vivian of Pencalenick, and
taken the name.

His youngest son, Mr. Joseph Edwards, married Miss Devonshire of
Truro, where he practised the Law with great credit and success.

The company directed by Mr. Edwards experienced the rivalship in trade
of a very able and enterprising individual Mr. John Harvey, and after
his decease, still more powerfully of his son. Each party in this
legitimate and beneficial contest endeavoured to improve their
respective portions of the harbour, and by so doing acted favourably
on the whole. Mr. Edwards led the way by extending a mound across the
eastern arm, and keeping back the high water at flood tide, which
being suffered to escape through gates some hours afterwards, swept
the sand before it, and deepened the channel. Mr. Harvey on his part
constructed quays and wharfs, and recently a sluice, so that the
interior of the harbour may be considered as improved to the utmost
extent; but works are still wanting to confine the current of water
beyond the entrance, and thus to force a channel through the bar,
produced here as in all other debouches of rivers, by the deposit of
silt, of sand, or of mud, where the currents meet and occasion
comparatively still water.

A work most beneficial to the whole country was completed at Hayle in
the year 1825, under the authority of an Act of Parliament. The
passage across the main estuary was frequently dangerous and always
interrupted by the tide; several of the branches could not be passed
at high water, and lives were not unfrequently lost. A causeway
provided with arches and parapets, now affords a safe line of
communication from Penzance and the Western Peninsula, to the
eastward; and all the roads are raised above the utmost range of the
tide.

Mr. Lysons notices two castles said to have formerly stood in this
parish, one still called Castle Cayle; but it seems to be very
doubtful whether any castellated house was ever built there, or even a
military work, as the word castle appears to have been frequently
applied in ridicule, and there are not extant any accounts relating to
this place.

The other, situated at the entrance of the river, a much more probable
situation, and called Riviere or Theodore’s Castle. The walls, if any
ever existed, are taken down, and all traces of a foundation are
hidden by the sand.

Mr. Whitaker, who captivates every reader by the brilliancy of his
style, and astonishes by the extent of his multifarious reading,
draws, however, without reserve on his fertile imagination for
whatever facts may be requisite to construct the fabric of a theory.
He has made Riviere the palace and residence of Theodore, a sovereign
Prince of Cornwall, and conducts St. Breca, St. Iva, with several
companions, not only into Hayle and to this palace, after their voyage
from Ireland, but fixes the time of their arrival so exactly as to
make it take place in the night. In recent times the name of Riviere,
which had been lost in the common pronunciation, Rovier, has revived
in a very excellent house built by Mr. Edwards on the farm, which he
completed in 1791.

The place of most importance in Phillack was Trevassack, for many
years the residence of the Yorkes, a considerable family from
Somersetshire.

Richard Yorke, of Wellington, married a daughter of Andrew Luttrell,
of Dunster Castle; and his grandson, Humphry Yorke, settled
at Trevassack; married Barbara, daughter of John Vyvyan, of
Trelowarren; and their granddaughter, Sarah Yorke, was the mother
of Attorney-general Noye. Some traces of its former splendour may
still be discovered. Erasmus Pascoe, who served the office of Sheriff
in 1720, resided at this place; it now belongs to the partnership
carrying on copper-smelting and trade at Hoyle.

In much more modern times a good house has been built on Bodrigy,
which belonged to a branch of the Pendarveses, then to Williams, and
was sold by three sisters, coheiresses of that family, to Mr. John
Curnow, who acquired a large fortune by carrying on the trade of Hoyle
for more than half a century, before modern energies altered and
extended the scale of every mercantile transaction.

Mr. Curnow also purchased Penpoll, and resided there. His property
became ultimately divided between three daughters, one of whom married
Mr. Robert Oke Millett, who succeeded Mr. Curnow at Penpoll, and has
made it a handsome place. It now belongs to his son, the Rev. John
Curnow Millett. Another daughter married the Rev. William Hocken, the
late Rector of the parish: and the third married Mr. Parmenter from
Ilfracombe. Mr. Curnow was of the family mentioned under Lugvan.

Treglisson is a large farm, having on it a good house inhabited for
many years by the family of Nichols, proprietors of the freehold.

Phillack, in addition to the copper works at Hoyle, possesses also a
tin smelting house at a village called indifferently Angarrack or
Vellarvrane. It is said to be the first smelting house established by
Becher and the other Germans for smelting tin ores in reverberatory
furnaces by means of coal. During the life of Mr. William Tremaine the
late managing partner, this place was decorated with the finest garden
in the West of Cornwall.

The advowson of this Rectory was in the Arundell family, but held for
a considerable time on a lease for lives, by the Collinses of
Treworgan in St. Erme: but on the death of Mr. Edward Collins in Jan.
1734, the lease having expired, and the presentation having reverted
to Lord Arundell, a Catholic, the exercise of the right for that turn
lapsed to the University of Oxford; and the living was given by
convocation to the Rev. William Glover from Worcestershire, originally
a member of Balliol College, and afterwards one of the Chaplains of
All Souls. He married a daughter of the preceding Rector, and resided
at Phillack all the remainder of his life.

To guard against a similar lapse, a new lease for lives was granted by
Lord Arundell to Mr. Hockin of Gwithian, whose son succeeded to Mr.
Glover; and on the general sale of the Arundell property, this
gentleman had the opportunity of purchasing the freehold, and his son
the Rev. William Hockin is now the Patron and Rector of Phillack.

The parish feast is kept on the nearest Sunday to the 23d of November,
being the day consecrated to St. Clement, Pope and Martyr.

  Phillack measures 2575 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815         16,393    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           352   19    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {   1475   |   2119   |    2529    |   3053
    giving an increase of 107 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The rocks of this parish, like those of Gwinear adjoining, belong to
the prophyritic series; the northern part is covered with hillocks of
sand, a considerable portion of which, as on some part of Gwithian,
has been drifted from place to place by the action of the wind; this
to a certain extent is now prevented by a covering of arenaceous
plants, the extensive fibrous roots of which form a loose spongy net
work, which serves to retain the sand in its place. This sand was
originally of marine origin, being at low levels entirely composed of
fragments of marine shells; but inland, on more elevated places, a
considerable portion of terrestrial shell enters into its composition:
these have been derived from the myriads of the snail tribe, which
browse on the scanty herbage of these dreary _Towans_. The inland
drifts, after a strong wind, will be found to consist almost entirely
of the fragments of those land shells. On the coast this testaceous
sand is in several places consolidated into calcareous sandstone; but
this has taken place on a more extended scale in the parish of
Crantock.


THE EDITOR.

This parish, like Guinear, has large copper lodes running through it,
and elvan courses of an extraordinary breadth. Whele Alfred has been
wrought on a larger scale than any copper mine so far west.




PILLATON.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Pillaton, in the hundred of East, joins to the west with Quethiock and
Lanrake, to the north with St. Mellyn, to the east with St. Dominick
and Landulph, to the south with Botusfleming.

This church is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book at £16. 15_s._
6_d._; the patronage in Sir John Coryton, Bart. In 1291, 12 Edw. I.
this church was valued (Tax. Benef.) at xlvi_s._ viii_d._ having never
been appropriated.

The manor is called in Domesday Book “Pileton,” being one of the
manors which William the Conqueror gave to Robert Earl of Morton, when
he made him Earl of Cornwall.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons gives a short history of the principal or only manors in
this parish. The manors of Pillaton and Hardenfast were at an early
period in a family bearing the singular name of Inkpen; then they
belonged to Dorothy Dillington, heiress of John Charles, esq. who sold
them to Thomas Moone. From this gentleman, Mr. Lysons says the manors
passed to the family of Coryton, although he does not state in what
way. They were ultimately devised by Sir John Coryton, who died in
1739, to his widow, and by her to the family of Helyar.

Pentillie Castle is in this parish, one of the most splendid seats in
the whole county, as well in regard to the magnificence of the
castellated house constructed by the present proprietor, John Tillie
Coryton, esq. on the site of a former house called Pentillie Castle,
as to the beauty and grandeur of the scenery, and to the romantic hill
and dale of the grounds.

This place was the seat of Sir James Tillie, who left the property to
his sister’s son, Mr. James Woolley, who took the name of Tillie, and
his granddaughter brought the estate to the late John Coryton, esq.
Sheriff of Cornwall in 1782, as his son has been in 1808.

The church and tower are not distinguished from others in the
neighbourhood, except by a south transverse aisle belonging to
Pentillie, and containing monuments to different members of the
family. In the body of the church is an inscription commemorating the
Rev. Ralph Eliot, who died in 1625, having been Rector of the parish
during fifty years.

The church town is small, and there is but one other village, called
Penters Cross.

The late Mr. Weston Helyar was patron of the rectory.

  Pillaton measures 1957 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          2,236    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           185    6    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    336   |    477   |     452    |    413
    giving an increase of 23 per cent. in 30 years, but in a
      progression so irregular as to indicate some local cause
      affecting it.
  Present Rector, the Rev. H. Woolcombe, instituted in 1816.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Like the adjoining parishes of St. Mellion and Landrake, this parish
is confined within the limits of the calcareous series, and rests on
similar kinds of rocks.




ST. PINNOCK.


HALS.

The manuscript of this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

St. Pinnock is in the hundred of West; hath to the west Bradock and
Boconnock, to the north St. Neot, to the east Liskeard, to the south
Lanreath and Duloe.

This church is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book at of £17. 13_s._
6_d._; the patronage in Mrs. Manley, widow of John Manley, esq. in her
own right, John Trefry, esq. and Robert Hoblyn, esq. _alternis
vicibus_; the incumbent Mr. Bishop. In 1291, 20 Edw. I. this church is
not valued at all; for what reason I cannot guess; and hath never been
appropriated. [It has been taken, no doubt, out of one of the
adjoining parishes, since the formation of that Valor. _Whitaker._]


THE EDITOR.

There seems to be very little worthy of notice in this parish.

The only village in the parish is Trevillis, which, with a manor of
the same name, belonged in early times to the family of Willington,
but were purchased by the family of Robarts of Truro, and now belong
to their representative Mrs. Agar.

The chief proprietors of other lands in St. Pinnock are J. T. Austen,
esq. of Place in Fowey, Thomas Bond, esq. of Looe, as heir of the
Colliers, who resided at Bosent, the Rev. Joseph Pomery, &c. The
church tower may be seen from the turnpike road about three miles
westward from Leskeard.

The advowson of the rectory is now divided between Mr. Joseph Pomery,
Mr. Austen, and Mr. Coryton.

  St. Pinnock measures 2674 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1816    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           189   12    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    302   |    316   |     431    |    425
    giving an increase of 40 per cent. in thirty years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. George Fortescue, instituted in 1789.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish is situated on the same kind of rocks as those of the
adjacent parishes of Broadoak and Leskeard, which belong to the
calcareous series.




POUGHILL.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Poughill is in the hundred of Stratton, and is washed to the west by
the sea and Bude Bay, to the north joins Kilkhampton, to the east and
south Stratton.

This church is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book, at £6. 12_s._
6_d._; the patronage in the Crown, or in the Duke of Cornwall; the
incumbent Mr. Charles Orchard.

In the year 1291, 20 Edward I. the rectory of this church, by the name
of Ecclesia de Pegwille, is valued at liij_s._ iv_d._ it being then
appropriated to the Abbey of Cleve in Somersetshire; and the vicarage,
“Nihil propter paupertatem.”

In Domesday Book, amongst the manors given by William the Conqueror to
his half-brother, Robert Earl of Morton, when he made him Earl of
Cornwall, is Pochehelle, which probably gave name to this parish,
turned euphoniæ gratiâ to Poughill.


THE EDITOR.

This parish, although it is small and situated in a remote part of the
county, possesses several ancient family seats, and a well-built
church, with various monuments, placed in a valley full of trees, and
opening immediately to the sea.

The manor, including the whole parish, originally without doubt in
possession of the lands, although it is now become, like innumerable
other manors, a mere royalty, was given by Hubert de Burgh, Earl of
Kent, to the Abbey of Clyve in Somersetshire. It is an instance,
however, of the small reliance that can be placed on the orthography
of ancient names, since the charter of Hubert de Burgo is in these
words:

“Sciant præsentes et futuri, quod ego Hubertus de Burgo Domini Regis
Camerarius, dedi, concessi, et hac præsenti cartâ mea confirmavi, Deo
et Beatæ Mariæ et monachis de Cliva, ibidem Deo servientibus et
servituris, pro salute animæ meæ, et patris et matris meæ, et omnium
antecessorum et parentum et herædum meorum, in perpetuam elemosinam,
totum dominicum quod habui in Rugeham,” which must be Poughill.

And in a charter of confirmation by Richard Earl of Cornwall it is
thus mentioned:

“Richardus comes Pictaviæ et Cornubiæ, &c. &c. noverit universitas
vestra me concessisse, et hac præsenti cartâ meâ confirmasse, &c.
totas terras quas habuerunt in Cornubiâ, videlicet Pochewille,” et
Treglastan, cum pertinendis, quas prius habuerunt ex dono domini
Huberti de Burgo comitis Kanc. &c.

Mr. Lysons, who, from his situation in the Tower, possessed the most
ample means of ascertaining all transactions with the Crown, states
that King James the First sold this manor to two gentlemen, Mr. George
Salter and Mr. John Williams; in more recent times it belonged to the
family of Stanbury, and is now the property of Thomas Troad, esq.

Mr. Lysons relates, on the authority of William of Worcester, that
Nicholas Radford, counsel for Lord Bonville, against Thomas Courtenay,
Earl of Devon, was slain in his own house in the year 1437, by Thomas
Courtenay, eldest son, and afterwards successor to his father. There
is, however, an anachronism as to William Bonville, who was first
summoned to Parliament twelve years afterwards, as Baron Bonville, and
died in 1480, leaving the barony in fee to his great-granddaughter,
married to Thomas Grey, Marquis of Dorset.

The Reverend Charles Dayman, lately deceased, resided, as his family
had done for several generations, at Flexbury in this parish; and Mr.
John Bryant is said to have succeeded a long line of ancestors at
Bushill, a seat decorated by several remains of the magnificent house
at Stowe.

The great tithes belong to George Boughton Kingdon, esq.; but the
distinguishing honor of this parish is Stamford Hill, so called from
the position taken there by Lord Stamford, commanding the
parliamentary army in 1643; and where Sir Beville Granville,
commanding the Cornish army, obtained one of the most splendid
victories achieved during the whole course of the civil war. It is
unnecessary to repeat the details of this battle, which are given by
Hyde and by most of our general historians. Its effects nearly decided
the struggle in favour of the party supporting the system of
hereditary power in a single hand.

  This parish measures 1,759 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1979    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           176   15    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    297   |    355   |     378    |    300
    giving an increase of 21 per cent. in 30 years, with a decrease,
      however, of 78 persons in the last 10 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. John Davis, presented in 1810 by Lord
    Chancellor Eldon.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The small parish of Poughill is composed of compact and schistose
dunstone, similar to the adjacent parish of Kilkhampton.




POUNDSTOCK.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Poundstock is in the hundred of Lesnewith, and hath to the west St.
Ginnis, to the north the sea and Stratton, to the east Marhamchurch,
to the south Jacobstow.

In anno 1291, 20 Edw. I. this church was valued at £8 (Tax. Benef.);
being since appropriated to the college of Slapton in Devon.

This is a vicarage valued in the King’s Book, £13. 6_s._ 8_d._; the
patronage in Lord Arundell of Wardour; the incumbent Mr. ――――
Whitford, who was presented to it by the University of Oxford, on
account of the recusancy of the patron, the Lord Arundell of Wardour.

The first place in it to the west, is Trebarfoot; this gave name and
habitation to a race of gentlemen.

Penfoune was likewise the seat of a very ancient family, from hence
denominated.

But this family, by Mr. Hals’s mistake, being already treated of in
Jacobstowe, I shall only add here, that in Domesday Book is a manor
called Penfon, by which probably this place is meant; and if so, it
was one of those given by William the Conqueror to Robert Earl of
Morton, when he made him Earl of Cornwall.

The manor of Poundstock is called in Domesday Book Ponpestock, and was
one of the manors given by William the Conqueror to Robert Earl of
Morton, when he made him Earl of Cornwall.


THE EDITOR.

The church of this parish is situated in a pleasant valley, but
without any thing peculiar by which it may be distinguished from
others.

The principal village in the parish is called Tregoll.

Mr. Lysons says that Poundstock was held under the manor of Launcels,
citing the Exeter Domesday; and that the manor of West Widemouth was
granted by Reginald Earl of Cornwall, to William Botreaux, from whom
it passed by female heirs to the families of Hungerford and Hastings;
from the last it was purchased by the Granvilles, and now belongs to
Lord Carteret.

The manor of Woolston was purchased by the late Lord Dunstanville.

The great tithes of this parish were purchased by Mr. George Browne of
Bodmin, when the whole Arundell property in Cornwall was sold, about
fifty years ago; and now belong to his grandson.

The advowson of the vicarage is in John Dayman, esq. and the Rev.
Charles Dayman, was instituted as Vicar in 1809.

  This parish measures 4304 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2984    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           389    0    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    617   |    635   |     744    |    727
    giving an increase of 18 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The rocks of this parish resemble those of Jacobstow and St. Gennis.




PROBUS.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

St. Probus is situate in the hundred of Powder, and is bounded to the
west by St. Erme, St. Clement’s, St. Michael Penkivell and Merther, to
the north by Ladock and St. Stephen’s, to the east by St. Stephen’s
also and Creed, to the south by St. Cuby and Cornelly.

In the year 1291, the 20th of Edward the First, the rectory of this
parish was valued at £12, being then appropriated to the college
there; the vicarage, i_l._ vi_s._ viii_d._; and the prebends,

                                               £.  _s._ _d._
  Porcio Mag’ri Thome de Ainton (or Bucton)    2    0    0
  Porcio Joh’is de Bristol                     2   10    0
  Porcio Gilb’ti de Frendon                    1    0    0
  Porcio Mag’ri de Hendre                      2    0    0

In Wolsey’s valuation, the vicarage of this parish with Cornelly, and
under the denomination of Probus Groguth, are valued at £13. 6_s._
8_d._ The patronage in the Bishop of Exeter. The sheaf held partly by
impropriation, and partly by lease from the Bishop of Exeter, by
Philip Hawkins, esq. The incumbent is Mr. Reynolds.

That part of the parish which joins with St. Clement’s is held from
the great Duchy manor of Moresk.

The barton of Trehane, which signifies the Old Town, gave name to an
ancient family who flourished a long time in this place, and gave for
their arms, Argent, three bars Sable, charged with nine martlets of
the First.

―― Scawen, gent. sold this barton in the early part of the 17th
century, to John Williams of Carvean, esq. only brother to William
Williams of Trewithgy, esq. Mr. Williams built a large brick house
here, but died very soon after that he got into it, leaving three
daughters by his wife, the only daughter and heir of John Courtenay of
Tregelles, gent. who died a few days before him in childbed; for grief
of which, it is said, he broke his heart: he left three daughters,
Mary, Ann, and Catherine, all very young, and up to this time all
unmarried (about 1730). But that his estate might not be divided, he
gave it solely to his eldest daughter Mary, who now possesses it, with
a considerable estate of the duchy adjoining. The arms are the same
with Williams of Trevorva.

Not far from Trehane is Carvean, or the Little Town, which was the
seat in lease (it belonging to the manor of Gowlden) to the above
mentioned John Williams, esq. on whose death it fell into the lord’s
hand, who granted a new lease of it to William Hobbs, gent.

Joining with Carvean, there being nothing between them but a road, is
Trewother, which was for several generations the seat in lease of the
family of Huddy, the freehold being in the Trevanions of Carhays.

I next come to the manor of Trelowthes, which I take to be the same
which is called by Mr. Carew Trelowith, which means the town place of
trees.

Next is the manor of Trewithgy, alias Trenowith, alias Treworgy; but
as I take the first to be the right name, I give its interpretation,
which doth signify a town of trees by the river.

Francis Tregian, pronounced Trudgean, forfeited this with his other
estates.

Trevorva, which may mean Trevor and va, for da, the dwelling on the
good road, but called so, I suppose, by the rule of contraries, the
road being one of the deepest and worst in the whole country; but
which according to the old proverb is

  Bad for the rider, but good for the bider――

making amends by the richness of its soil.

This barton, which is of a very good yearly value, was once the
dwelling of a family bearing the same name; the last of which family
had an only daughter and heir, who married ______ Williams of
Herringstone in the county of Dorset, which match was the first
settling of that family in Cornwall.

The arms of Williams are, Argent, a greyhound current between three
Cornish choughs Proper, within a plain border Gules, charged with six
crosses formee Or and as many Bezants.

The present Mr. Williams, owner of this barton, lives at a place
adjoining called Trewithan, where the family removed, probably
disliking the dirty situation of Trevorva.


TREWITHAN, THE TOWN OR DWELLING OF TREES.

This place lies high and very pleasantly.

After the Williams’s had flourished for some time at Trewithan,
Courtenay Williams, when he had foolishly squandered away a pretty
estate, and a good fortune too, which he had with his wife Elizabeth,
the eldest daughter and coheir of the Rev. ―――― May, also M.D. sold
this barton for £2700 to Philip Hawkins, esq. brother to the Rev. Dr.
Hawkins of Pennance, and a member in this present Parliament (1730)
for Granpont. He now resides here, has very much improved this seat,
new built a great part of the house, made good gardens, &c.


THE MANOR OF WALVEDEN, GULDEN, OR GOLDEN.

There flourished for a long series of years a family of the same name,
the last of which, John Walveden, esq. had only two daughters and
coheirs, of whom the eldest having married ―――― Tregion, esq. brought
to her husband this and several other fair estates. The other sister,
Catherine, married Nicholas Carminow, esq. of Trenouth in this parish.
On the decease of his father-in-law, which happened in the year 1514,
Mr. Tregian settled himself here, and lived in great splendour. Leland
mentions the house as building, and Carew says, Walvedon, alias
Golden, fell into Tregion, by match with the inheritrix thereof.

Their son married an Arundell of Lanherne. Their grandson with the
Lord Stourton’s daughter.

The arms of Tregion are Ermine, on a chief Sable, three birds Or,
beaked and legged Argent.

But Mr. Carew, though it happened in his time, does not mention the
great misfortune which befel their grandchild, Francis Tregian, esq.
though it was not long before (twenty-five years) and ended in the
total ruin of this wealthy and flourishing family; in giving an
account of which I will be as brief as the thing will bear. Mr. Camden
has touched on it in his Annals of Queen Elizabeth, (A. D. 1577, Reg.
19): “Hactenus serena tranquillitas Pontificiis in Angliâ affulsit,
qui quâdam misericordi conniventiâ sua sacra inter privatos parietes,
licet illa legibus interdicta, pecuniariâ mulctâ inflictâ, quodam modo
impune celebrarant, nec Regina vim conscientiæ afferendam censuit.
Verùm postquam illud fulmen excommunicationis Romæ in Reginam fuisset
ejaculatum, in nubes et tempestates serenitas illa paulatim abiit,
legemque elicuit anno 1571, contra eos, qui ejusmodi Bullas, Agnos
Dei, et grana benedicta, papalis obsequii tesseras, in regnum
intulerint, aut aliquum Romanæ ecclesiæ reconciliarint, ut diximus.
Primus hâc lege tenebatur Cuthbertus Mainus sacerdos, qui Pontificiæ
contra Principem potentiæ assertor pervicax,” without any overt act,
as far as appears here, against the new law, by bringing in any bulls,
&c. or by reconciling any to the Church of Rome, “ad fanum Stephani
(Launston vulgo vocant) in Cornwalliâ supplicio affectus, et Trugionis
nobilis qui eum hospitio acceperat” [only had entertained him in his
house], “fortunas eversus perpetuoque carceri adjudicatus.” And that
you may see what a noble fortune he lost, it being his hard hap to be
the first, as Cuthbert Maine to suffer death, so he to lose his estate
and liberty by this severe law; and being besides myself descended
from this gentleman’s sister, Jane Tregian, married to Thomas
Tonkin of Trevaunance, I shall here set down an abstract of an
exemplification of the inquisition taken at Lanceston, 5 Car. I. in
the lands, &c. of the said Mr. Tregian, of which I shall give only the
substance. Inquisitio indentat. capt. apud Lanceston in com. prædict.
on Monday the 1st of March, anno 5 Car. before William Wray, knight,
Walter Langden, knight, James Bagg, knight, Nicholas Borlase, esq.
Peter Hussey, esq. and William Stowell, gent. Commissioners, &c. on
the oaths of Sampson Manington, esq. Robert Dodson, esq. Nicholas
Leach, esq. Christopher Pollard, gent. Humfrey Lower, gent. James
Hoskins, gent. Richard Bettison, gent. Digory Prouse, gent. John
Rawlyn, gent, and Roger Edgcumbe, gent. That the said Francis Trugeon,
in the said commission named, was indicted, convicted, and attainted
of præmunire, as in the said commission is contained, on the said 20
April, 19 Elizabeth, and also on Monday aforesaid, in the said fourth
week in Lent, anno 21 Elizabeth, was seized

  “in dominico suo ut de feodo de et in” the
  manor of Digembris, alias Degembris, “in
  p’och. de Newlyn,” et alibi, in com. dict.
  quæ valent per ann. in omnibus exitibus
  ultra reprisas,                           £21.  4_s._ 8_d._

  The manor of Trewithgy cum p’tiis, in
  p’och. de Probus, &c.                      15    2    0

  The manor of Tregyn, alias Tregion, cum
  p’tiis, in p’och. de St. Ewe                4    0    0

  The manor of Tremolla, alias Tremolleth,
  cum p’tiis, in p’och. de Northill,
  Linkinhorne, and Leskeard, &c.              5   12    8

  The manor of Bodmin, alias Bodman, et
  Keyland, cum p’tiis, in p’och. de Bodman
  et Lostwithiel, &c.                        13    0    0

  The manor of Landegey and Lanner, cum
  p’tiis, in p’och. de St. Key, et alibi,
  quæ valent, &c.                            36   10    8

  The manor of Carvolghe, alias Carvaghe,
  cum p’tiis, in p’och. de Morvan, et St.
  Tes, et alibi                               4   14    6

  The manor of Tollays, alias Tolgus, cum
  p’tiis, in p’och. de Redruth et St. Just,
  et alibi                                   23   10    0

  The manor of Truro et Tregrewe, cum
  p’tiis, in p’och. de Kenwyn et Truro, et
  alibi, quæ valent                          22   15    4

  The manor of Bedoche, alias Besache, cum
  p’tiis, in p’och. de Lazache, et alibi,
  &c.                                        11    8    1

  The manor of Wolvedon, alias Goulden,
  cum p’tiis, in p’och. de St. Probus et
  Tregony, et alibi, &c.                    242   13   10

  The manor of Treleigh, cum p’tiis, in
  p’och. de Redruth, &c.                      4    1    0

  The manor of East Drayns, cum p’tiis, in
  p’och. de St. Nyott, et St. Cleere, four
  parts in five, quæ valent                  10    0    0

  The manor of Kalerso, cum p’tiis, in
  p’och. de Hilary et Sythney, four parts
  in five, quæ valent, &c.                   10   11    6

  The manor of Elerkey and Lanyhorne, alias
  Rewyn Lanyhorne, cum p’tiis in p’och. de
  Ruan et St. Veryan, one half, quæ valent   17   17    3

  The manor of Penpoll, alias Penpole, cum
  p’tiis, in p’och. de St. Germyns et
  Quethiocke, one half, quæ valent, &c.      32   14    8

  The manor of Bunerdake, cum p’tiis, in
  p’och. de St. Ive, one half, quæ valent,
  &c.                                         4   10    6

  A burgage in Leskeard, &c. cum p’tiis       1    0    0

  Several tenements in Rogroci et
  Lestreiake, in Germow et Brake              0   13    4

  A tenement in Trewerrys, alias Tregwerys,
  in p’och. de Probus                         0    2    0

  A tenement in Villa de Grampont, valet,
  &c.                                         0    8    0

  The manor of Rosemodens, alias Rosemodros,
  cum p’tiis, in p’och. de Buryan, St.
  Hillarie, Pawle, et Gwynneier, four parts
  in five, quæ valent, &c.                   15    0    0
                                             ――――――――――――
                                     Total  497    0    0
                                             ――――――――――――

But note here that you are not to judge of the real value of Mr.
Tregian’s estate by this return, except it be in the manor of Gowlden,
where the demesne is valued as well as the rents. I have heard several
intelligent people say, that the estate of this family in this county
alone, was worth at the least £3000 per annum, besides a large sum
they were possessed of in ready money, which enabled them to build
such a noble house here, of which the remains are still magnificent;
and among these, under an old tower, they still show the place where
Cuthbert Mayne the priest was found concealed.

Norden says, that Mr. Tregion remained in prison full twenty years,
but that he was released by an order of Queen Elizabeth herself about
1597, and that he afterwards lived near London, supported, as was
believed, by the bounty of his friends. Francis Tregion the son,
having repossessed himself by purchase and by favour of some part of
the property taken from his father, found that he could not stem the
tide raised against him by persons envious of his returning
prosperity, or eager to obtain the plunder of his possessions, as had
been done by his father; for in January 1608, this persecuted family
suffered in his person a further and second loss of their estates, in
some degree owing perhaps to the strong feelings of apprehension and
of resentment occasioned by the Gunpowder Plot of November the 5th,
three years before.

Mr. Tregion, resolving to do the best that he could, received some
money by compounding with various parties to confirm their titles, and
thus embarked for Spain, where, as it is said, he was very well
received on account of his own and his father’s sufferings for
religion, and that he was made a grandee of that Kingdom; and that his
posterity still flourish there with the title of Marquis of St.
Angelo. Whether this be true or not I cannot affirm, having it only by
tradition; however, we hear no more of him in this country.

The next that we find in possession of this barton, and living there,
was Ezekiel Grose: he died here, and left it to his only daughter and
heir, married to ―――― Buller, esq. of Shillingham, with a great estate
in other parishes, in whose posterity it continued till the year 1710,
when James Buller, esq. the last of that branch, dying without issue,
gave the whole by will to his great-uncle, who had acquired Morval
through a marriage with the heiress of Coode.

Talbot, which is an abbreviation of Haleboat, says Norden, p. 61, is a
rock called Ha-le-boate rock, wherein to this day are seen many great
iron rings, whereunto boats have been tied, although there is now no
show of an haven, but only a little brook running through the valley
into a branch of the River Fall.

To the north-east of Gowlden lies Tredenham, a small manor which the
late Sir Joseph Tredenham believed to be Denhamstown, and derived
himself from a younger branch of the family which formerly resided
there, which he also testified by his arms, Argent, a bend lozengy
Gules, by way of distinction, as was usual in former times, from the
parent stock, which gave Gules, three lozenges in fess Ermine. But
however that may be, this was the seat of the Tredenhams for many
generations, till they removed, first to Kellion in Cornelly, and then
to Tregonnan in St. Ewe.

This small manor, from which some estates are held, particularly
Corvith in St. Cuby, was sold with the greater part of the Tredenham
property in 1727, to Doctor John Hawkins of Pennance, who is the
present lord of it.


CURVOZA.

That is the walled or fortified town, so called from an intrenchment,
for voza properly signifies a trench or place cast up. This trench was
measured for me by Mr. Joseph Webber, steward to Miss Mary Williams of
Trehane, the proprietor; and it proved to be two hundred and ten paces
in circumference.

[Car or Cair is a fort, and voza and voran are the plural of voz or
vore, a ditch (see Pryce’s Vocabulary). Corvoza would therefore be the
entrenched fort. ED.]


THE EDITOR.

The church at Probus is large, but not remarkable for any thing beyond
other churches in the neighbourhood. In it are some monuments, and
especially one to Mr. Thomas Hawkins of Trewithon, sometime member for
Grampound, who died in 1766. This gentleman not having passed the
small-pox, and resolving on being inoculated, thought it was his duty
to extend the same benefit to all his neighbours in the parish.
Several scores had in consequence this dreadful disease communicated
to them in its mitigated form, and all recovered except the benevolent
individual himself, who thus extensively introduced inoculation, at
that time a novelty in Cornwall among the great mass of the people. He
is supposed to have carried too far the asthenic system for
counteracting fever, and perhaps to have taken the contagion, in what
is termed the natural way, previously to the artificial communication.

Although the church is not superior to others around it, the tower is
on the whole more magnificent than any other in the county. The tower
at Weck St. Mary, near Stratton, is said to be somewhat more lofty;
and several exceed that at Probus in elegance and lightness of
proportions, but this combines massiveness, altitude, and elaborate
decoration; moreover, it has been built since the Reformation, and
according to tradition, by the voluntary contributions of the
unmarried inhabitants of the parish; but the same is said of a lofty
tower at Derby; and of the windows of St. Neot’s Church, one is given
by the unmarried men, and another by the single women of that parish.

It is quite clear that this church was collegiate, having a dean and a
certain number of prebendaries, founded in very early times before the
Norman Conquest, and probably by St. Edward. The Deanery became
attached with its share of the endowments to the Church of Exeter, but
in a way which Mr. Whitaker himself has not succeeded in clearly
making out. The prebendaries or some of them remained till the general
dissolution, when the prebends were given or sold, and have passed
through the Williams’s, by purchase to the Hawkins family, with some
fairs. One fair, however, is the grant of King Charles the Second. Few
gentlemen’s houses in the west of Cornwall were without the honour of
receiving Prince Charles during his residence in Cornwall, about the
middle part of the civil wars; and he is said to have remained for a
time longer than usual with Mr. Williams, who, after the Restoration,
waited on the King with congratulations from the parish; and on being
complimented by him with the question whether he could do any thing
for his friends, answered that the parish would esteem themselves
highly honoured and distinguished by the grant of a fair, which was
accordingly done for the 17th of September; this fair coming the last
in succession after three others, has acquired for itself a curious
appellation derived from the two patron saints, and from the peculiar
pronunciation in that neighbourhood of the word last, somewhat like
_laest_:――

  Saint Probus and Grace,
  Not the first but the last,

――and from this distinction it is usually called Probus and Grace
fair.

It is utterly impossible now to give any account of these two
personages, except that they were in all probability missionaries from
Ireland. Nor is the Roman name of Probus any objection against this
supposition, since such names were frequently assumed. The apostle of
Ireland has a Roman name, and many of the religious must have been
foreigners.

On repairing the east wall of the chancel some few years since, two
skeletons were found in different niches, and one of these was
declared by anatomists to have been a female. These were supposed to
be the relics of St. Probus and of St. Grace, which may have been
true, although the present church cannot be less than eight hundred or
a thousand years later than their time.

No obvious indication can be discovered of the ancient college;
perhaps the prebendaries ceased to reside after the deanery became
absorbed at Exeter.

Mr. Whitaker has left several pages of memoranda on this parish,
evidently notes made at the time of his visit there, and not arranged
in any order. The Editor thinks it therefore most expedient to adopt
such parts only as seem to explain the etymologies, or to give
information respecting facts.

Mr. Whitaker observes, that, although the dedication of this parish is
to St. Probus alone, yet assuredly St. Grace should be adopted also as
a patron saint. The parish feast kept in the early part of July, is
always designated by their joint names. No notice is taken of either
in Bede.

On Carvean, Mr. Whitaker says, that it means the Little Marsh, as cars
is a bay, a marsh, or a moor, corsen a reed, cors-hwyad in Welsh, is a
fen-duck, a moorhen.

On Trewithgy.――In English a house surrounded by trees, and lying in
the water. Trewithgy, Trenowith, and Treworgy, are different parts of
the same manor. Trenowith signifies the New Town, and Treworgy a local
name, remarkably common, as it is sure to be from its signification,
being the town upon the water, or rather perhaps, upon the running
stream.

Mr. Whitaker says, the manor of Probus appears from Domesday Book to
have been possessed by St. Edward the Confessor; it was therefore one
of the demesnes of the Crown at that time, and probably one of those
belonging to the sovereigns of Cornwall previously to the conquest by
the Saxons. Then I presume that an English family settled on those
lands, and held them of the Crown; probably the Walvedons, who held
them with Gowlden.

On this barton is an angular fort, says Borlase, p. 313 of his
Antiquities, second edition, “on the barton of Wolvedon, alias Golden,
in the parish of Probus, which has a wide deep ditch, the entire edge
or counterscarp of which was faced upwards with masonry of thin stones
in cement, which had round turrets or buttresses (such as neither
Saxons, Danes, nor Britons had, as far as ever I can find) of the same
masonry, interspersed with the straight lines of the ditch. This is
very singular in our county, where most of our ancient fortifications
are of a circular plan, without any projections (angular or circular)
from the master line. I can judge this, therefore, neither to be
British, Saxon, nor Danish, as being like no other work of these
people, and from the artful fence of this ditch, as well as from the
polygon which the whole forms, I guess it to be a Roman work. There is
a large avenue or way from the north, rising from an adjoining valley.

This fortified ground I examined in August 1792. It is an earthwork
denominated Warren, containing six Cornish acres, as the farmer told
me, or about seven statute acres. It has a high and broad rampart
twelve or fourteen feet high, and a deep ditch fourteen or sixteen
feet wide. The whole forms a long square, the greatest length from
east to west. It has two gateways on the north, and two on the south,
one on the east, and one on the west, each answering to the other, and
having a raised avenue across the ditch. I therefore conclude it to be
a Roman camp, made at the period when that people subdued Cornwall,
and calculated for the reception of a large detachment. The revetments
mentioned by Dr. Borlase do not appear, nor the projecting turrets.
About a mile to the north of this, beyond a deep gully, may be found
what is noticed by Mr. Tonkin as Caer Voza, and noticed by Doctor
Borlase in his Natural History, p. 324, as Caerfos or Caerfosou. This
is an estate, called so from a field close to the house, which has a
strong and lofty rampart upon the north side, and a large deep ditch
upon the north of that. These continue all along the northern side of
the field, and have a slight return on the east and west towards the
south; but then they cease, nor can any traces be found of them
afterwards. Perhaps this imperfect work may have been a camp of the
Britons opposed to that of the Romans, or one commenced at least for
that purpose.

Thus far Mr. Whitaker.

       *     *     *     *     *

Trehane, with a considerable property around it, were given, as Mr.
Tonkin has stated, by the last Mr. Williams of that place, to his
eldest daughter Mary, who married the Rev. William Stackhouse, D.D.
Rector of St. Erme, the adjoining parish. Doctor Stackhouse was from
the county of Durham, a brother of the Rev. Thomas Stackhouse, Vicar
of Beenham, Berks, well known by his learned works.

A complete body of Divinity――A fair statement of the controversy
between Mr. Woolston and his adversaries,――and various others; but
above all by an History of the Bible from the beginning of the World
to the establishment of Christianity, in two volumes folio, first
printed in 1732, a work that has gone through various editions, and
may be found in every good library.

Doctor Stackhouse left two sons, William and John. His eldest son
William, married one of the Miss Rashleighs of Menabilly, and settled
at Trehane, where he lived universally esteemed and respected till
June 1830, when he departed this life in his 90th year, leaving
Trehane to his eldest son, who resides there at present. Mr. John
Stackhouse, whose son Edward William Wynne Pendarves represents the
county in Parliament, is noticed under Cambourne.


TREWITHAN.

This place ranks among the principal seats in Cornwall. It stands on a
commanding situation, possesses extensive plantations, and looks over
those to the south and east into vallies highly cultivated and
rendered beautiful by wood and water, the two most pleasing
ingredients in rural landscapes. The house was in part built by Mr.
Courtenay Williams, who is said to have dissipated a handsome fortune
by indulging himself in low pursuits and in low company, and
especially by maintaining a set of people to accompany him from parish
to parish, for (what seems quite ludicrous in present times) the
purpose of ringing the bells; yet about the middle of the last century
a new peal of bells was procured for Kenwyn Church, to accommodate the
principal inhabitants of Truro with that exercise and amusement.

After the purchase of this place, together with the manor of Probus,
the appropriated share of the great tithes, the lease under the Church
of Exeter conveying the remainder part for lives, &c. Mr. Philip
Hawkins made Trewithan his residence, and represented Grampound in
three or four Parliaments in the Reign of George the Second; but not
having any family himself, nor his brothers, almost the whole of their
landed properties were devised to their eldest sister Mary, who had
married her distant relation, Mr. Christopher Hawkins of Helston, and
of Trewinnard in St. Erth. Their only son Mr. Thomas Hawkins,
succeeded his uncle at Trewithan, and also represented Grampound: he
married Ann, daughter of James Heywood, esq. of London; but being
unfortunately taken out of this life while he endeavoured to introduce
the most important discovery ever made in medicine, for the benefit of
others as well as of himself, he left five children minors, Philip,
Christopher, Thomas, John, and a daughter. Philip and Thomas died in
early life; the estate, therefore, devolved on Christopher, who having
never married, died in May 1829, and in consideration probably of the
large fortune possessed by his brother, devised the whole of his real
property to Henry Hawkins, his brother’s younger son, then about eight
years old, to whom it now belongs.

But the affair which most peculiarly distinguishes this parish is the
persecution of Mr. Tregion.

It appears from Camden’s Annales of Queen Elizabeth, inserted above,
and from contemporary historians, that, although enactments were made
(they must not be honoured with the name of laws) against Catholics,
imposing penalties and disabilities, and prohibiting altogether the
celebration of their peculiar rites supposed to conciliate the Divine
favour――yet if masses were performed without ostentation, and under a
decent veil of secrecy, or if auricular confessions were made and
absolutions received in private, little notice was taken of them, nor
were priests eagerly sought after, who divested themselves in public
of all peculiar and discriminating habits, and abstained from
attempting proselytism. But when the Church of Rome thundered its
excommunications against the Queen, when plots became more manifest at
home, connected also with the individual nearest to the Crown, if the
custom of hereditary succession were preserved; measures of great
severity were adopted, on the ever doubtful plea of state necessity:
so that more victims to religious opinions are said to have suffered
death, banishment, or the loss of liberty, under this reign, than
under that of Mary Tudor, whose very name we have all been taught to
associate with an epithet denoting the utmost horror: but her
persecutions were conducted without disguise, in the name of religion,
and to make forced converts, while Elizabeth professed to act from
motives of temporal policy; moreover, the religion of one has been
deprived of all its endowments, and been proscribed for two centuries;
that of the other, most happily for ourselves, has flourished through
the whole period.

It seems this Mr. Tregion and his connections were among the first
sufferers under this cruel policy. His father married an Arundell, and
himself a daughter of Lord Stourton, both families that have continued
up to the present times in the profession of the ancient faith. Mr.
Tregion had moreover a very large estate, calculated to excite the
zeal of a well-known and detested class of men, who from the time of
the Cæsars, and doubtlessly from a period long before, have used all
means and all pretences, sacred or profane, to advance their own
fortunes by the ruin of others.

Mr. Tregion, it appears, was the first or among the first accused
under the inflamed passions and the persecuting spirit of those times,
and the sheriff came in person to search his house; but the sheriff is
stated to have been a personal friend, or at all events as a
countryman and a neighbour, to have made a slight examination, and
then to have dined, and unfortunately to have drank with the
individual accused: when

  ――――Subita incantum Dementia cepit,
  Ignoscenda quidem, scirent si ignoscere Manes,

which induced him, in the pride and confidence inspired by wine, to
reproach his guest with the insufficiency of his search, and to
conduct him to a part of the house or premises clearly indicative of
his temporary imprudence and contempt. The sheriff, probably heated
also by wine, immediately renewed his examination, and finally
discovered in a secret hole under a turret, a Catholic clergyman,
called Cuthbert Mayne.

On this they were both arrested, and subsequently arraigned at the
Assizes, and both convicted of those atrocious crimes: Mr. Mayne of
being a Catholic Priest, and found in England; and Mr. Tregion of
having received into his house a minister of that religion in which he
had been bred, of the religion of his forefathers, of the religion of
the father and forefathers of the highly talented Female who then
mainly directed the affairs of the state, and of the undisputed and
sole religion of the whole country about half a century before. And
for these ideal offences, (one scruples to stain the paper with so
foul a record!) was Mr. Mayne actually hanged, and Mr. Tregion, under
the sentence of a premunire, was deprived of his whole property, and
suffered an imprisonment of twenty years.

Whether we contemplate the cold-hearted tyranny of Henry the Seventh,
the wild despotic sway of Henry the Eighth, the civil dissensions in
the nominal reign of his son, the bigotry and unrelenting persecutions
of Mary, or the cruelties, however necessary, exercised by Elizabeth,
we may indeed rejoice that the great work of the Reformation has been
achieved, at any price, by the House of Tudor; but we must join in the
exclamation,

  Oh! dearest God, forefend
    Such times should e’er return.

  Probus measures 7349 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           9392    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           902   12    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {   1013   |   1163   |    1353    |   1350
    giving an increase of about 33 per cent in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Robert Lampen, collated by the Bishop of
    Exeter in 1828.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The northern part of this parish rests on the porphyritic series, but
no where reaches the granite hills: its rocks are very felspathic and
metalliferous. The southern part comes into the calcareous series, and
its rocks are like those of Creed, Cuby, and Cornelly; the most
interesting of these rocks may be seen on the hill to the westward of
Grampound. They appear to afford a most decided example of greywacke,
exhibiting large grains, and even nodules of quartz on their fractured
surfaces; this however can only be seen on surfaces that have been for
some time exposed to the weather; for no such appearance can be
observed when the fractures are recent and perfect. These rocks are
probably masses of compact felspar, in the bases of which silica so
predominated at the time of their formation, as to have given rise to
large concretions of quartz.

       *     *     *     *     *

Since Doctor Boase made the geological examination of Cornwall, an
abridgment of which he has had the kindness and the liberality to
communicate for this work, the road leading westward from Grampound,
has been turned to the north, and thus obviated a steep and even
dangerous hill, and in consequence the sections referred to can no
longer be seen on the highway.




QUETHIOCK.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Quethiock is in the hundred of East, and joins to the west with St.
Cleer and Mehinnet, to the north with St. Ive, to the east with St.
Mellyn and Pillaton, to the south with St. German’s and Larnake.

In anno 1291, 20 Edward I. (Tax. Benef.) this church was valued at one
hundred shillings, being then appropriated to the Abbey of Tavistock.

This is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book, £15. 11_s._ 0_d._; the
patronage in the Bishop of Exeter; the incumbent Mr. Daniel Bawdry,
rector also of Worlegan.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons says that the ancient name of this parish was Cruetheke; it
is commonly pronounced Quithik.

The greater part of this parish belongs to Mr. Coryton of Pentillie.
Mr. Lysons gives a detail of the manors, but it is quite
uninteresting. One called the manor of Trehunsey, probably gives a
name to the principal village, Trehunest.

The church has on the outside an appearance of very great antiquity
verging on decay. Within, it contains several remnants of ancient
times, and monuments with inscriptions to the memory of former
parishioners.

The great tithes were appropriated to a chantry at Haccomb, in the
Deanery of Kenn, in Devonshire. Tanner says, in the church of St.
Blase here was a college or large chantry of five priests, under the
government of an archpresbyter in the reign of King Edward the Third.
Dugdale’s Monasticon, new edition, has the following history of this
place.

Mr. Oliver, in his Historic Collections, has printed the foundation
deed of this college, premising that the public notary has omitted to
affix the date to it in Bishop Grandison’s Register: but that by
comparing it with the institution of the first archpriest, Andrew de
Tregors, in fol. 46 of the 3d vol. of the same register, he was of
opinion that it must have been drawn up, either late in the year 1341,
or in the early part of 1342.

This foundation deed states that Sir Stephen de Haccombe had formerly
applied to Bishop Grandison to erect the parish church of St. Blase at
Haccombe, the burial place of his ancestors, into an archpresbytery;
that before the prelate could comply with his wishes, the knight died,
but that his heir Sir John L’Ercedekne had entered into his views, and
renewed the application to the Bishop, who had acceded to the request,
and consented to the appropriation of the parish church of St. Hugh de
Quedyock in Cornwall, for the better support of the archpriest and his
community. The community, besides the archpriest, consisted of five
clergymen, who were called Socii, who were bound to sing the canonical
office, and to celebrate obits; they dwelt under the same roof with
the archpriest, and lived in common. The archpriest was obliged to pay
six marks per annum to the Treasury of the Cathedral of Exeter.

Mr. Lysons says, in his Devonshire, p. 250, that the archpriest or
rector, as he is now called, continues to exist as the sole
representative of this college, enjoying its revenues: but certainly
not the great tithes of Quethiock, since they belong to Sir Henry
Carew of Haccomb, derived through the Courtenays. The vicarage is in
the gift of the Bishop.

It is stated in Dr. Borlase’s Collections, that there was formerly a
chapel in this parish, or tower, dedicated to St. Mary.

  Quithiock measures 3774 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           5756    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           354    5    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    587   |    585   |     684    |    692.
    giving an increase of 18 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. J. R. Fletcher, collated by the Bishop of
    Exeter in 1816.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is situated within the boundary of the calcareous series,
and with the exception of the serpentine at Clickitor in Menheniot, it
exhibits the same kind of rocks as that parish.




RAME.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Rame is in the hundred of East, and is surrounded to the west, south,
and part of the east by the sea, to the rest of the east by Maker, and
to the north by St. John’s.

This church is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book £12. 7_s._ 4_d._
ob.; the patronage in the Honorable Richard Edgcumbe, esq.; the
incumbent Mr. Thomas Wolridge.

In anno 1291, 20 Edward I. (Tax. Benef.) this church was valued at
xlvi_s._ viii_d._ having never been appropriated.


THE MANOR OF RAME.

In the extent of Cornish acres, 12 Edward I. this is valued in twenty
(Carew, fol. 48 b.) In 3 Hen. IV. Johanna de Rame held one great fee
of Seviock, meaning (I suppose) that she held this place as a great
knight’s fee of the said manor.

I take this Johanna de Rame to be the person that was married to
Stephen Durnford, esq. who was Sheriff of Cornwall, 7 Henry V. whose
only daughter and heir Jane brought this lordship, with a large
inheritance, to her husband Sir Pierce Edgcombe of Cuttvyle, and in
their posterity it still remaineth, the honorable Richard Edgcombe,
esq. being the present lord of this manor, and in right thereof,
patron of this parish, as was said before.

The arms of Rame were, in allusion to the name, Azure, a scalp of a
ram’s head Argent, armed; and Durnford’s Azure, an eagle displayed Or.

But the barton of Rame hath since often changed its owners.


THE EDITOR.

Rame church is situated in a very peculiar manner, far out on the
point of land, and immediately near a rocky cliff. It has several
monuments to former rectors and others, but none of general interest.

The manor of Rame, and the advowson of the living, continue in the
Edgcumbe family; but the barton has for some generations belonged to
the Edwardses, and, under the name of Rame Place, is still their
residence.

The remarkable feature of this parish is Rame Head, or as it is
usually called, the Ram; and it is a general belief that the name is
really taken from the resemblance of the point to the Roman battering
ram; as the Lizard is supposed to be so called, from the long flat
serpentine formation resembling the body of a saurian animal: but it
seems to be much more probable that these observed resemblances should
have corrupted some former names accidentally agreeing with them in
sound, than that the promontories should be really distinguished by
appellations so very modern.

Near the extremity of the point are the ruins of a chapel still very
visible, dedicated to St. Michael, as all chapels similarly situated
were dedicated by our ancestors, from the habits of a winged angel
being assimilated to those of birds.

The Ram Head itself exhibits the appearance of a grand mass of rocks
gradually tapering into the sea, much resembling Cudden Point in the
Mount’s Bay. It forms the exterior boundary of Plymouth Harbour to the
westward, as Penlee Point does of what is technically called the
Sound. The extreme point of the Ram Head is laid down in the best
tables with lat. 50° 18′ 52″ long. 4° 12′ 29.″ In time 16m. 50s. west
from Greenwich. The time of high water at Plymouth dock yard at the
new and full moon is 3h. 33m.

As this is the point of land nearest to the Eddystone lighthouse, it
may be interesting to add, that the lighthouse is distant from the Ram
Head just 8¼ sea miles, bearing about somewhat less than a point to
the westward of south, and from Looe Island 11½ sea miles bearing very
nearly south-east. Lat. 50° 10′ 55″, lon. 4° 15′ 3.″ In time 17m. west
of Greenwich. The Eddystone rocks had been for ages the dread of
mariners; they lie nearly in the direction of the line joining the
Lizard and the Start, and directly in the way of ships making Plymouth
harbour from the westward; their extent is moreover considerable,
reaching in one direction to about a mile, with only a small rock
appearing above the water.

The desire of a lighthouse was therefore strongly felt, and at last,
in the year 1696, Mr. Winstanley, of Littlebury in Essex, undertook
this arduous work, and completed it in about four years; but Mr.
Winstanley made his wooden fabric of a large size, and of great
height, trusting to the tenacity of chains and iron rods for its
support; not having learnt from experience that those materials are
incapable of resisting, for any considerable time, the repeated
percussions of a tempestuous sea.

Mr. Winstanley himself happened to be there on the 26th of November,
1703, when the storm took place, which is believed not to have been
equalled since that time. On the following day every thing had
disappeared, with the exception of two iron rods which were fastened
in the rock, and not a trace of the building was ever discovered.

Three years afterward, in the year 1706, Mr. John Rudyard undertook to
erect another light-house, undismayed by the terrible catastrophe of
the former; and this gentleman adopted the correct principle of
opposing the impact of waves by the force of gravity, a power equally
constant, certain and stable, as that by which it is opposed. He
therefore constructed a plain framework of wood, nearly cylindrical,
with cross beams, and filled the whole with large blocks of granite,
leaving no more room than was requisite for the lights, for the
attendants, and for their stores; and he made so rapid a progress as
to display the light on the 28th of July 1708, and completely to
finish the whole in the year following: notwithstanding that a French
privateer took off some workmen and their tools in the progress of the
work. But Louis the XIV. displayed on this occasion the real spirit of
generosity and honour, of which he had endeavoured to support a weak
resemblance throughout his long reign. He ordered the workmen and
their effects to be restored, and committed to prison the persons
concerned in this unprincipled act publicly; declaring that, although
he was at war with England, he was at peace with the human race, for
whose common benefit such works was constructed.

In Mr. Rudyard’s lighthouse the wooden frame was evidently an
imperfection. It must be liable to decay, and might become the prey of
flames. To obviate in some degree the former defect, contrivances were
adopted for shifting the beams; but on the 2d of December 1755, after
the work had stood forty-seven years, the wood-work actually caught
fire and was entirely consumed. Boats were dispatched from ships as
well as from the shore, when the flames became visible, which brought
away the three men, who had used their utmost endeavours, but in vain,
to extinguish the fire. Fortunately at that hour the tide was at its
ebb, which allowed the men to retreat sufficiently at a distance from
the heat to preserve their lives; two had received very little injury,
nor was the other apparently much hurt, but standing near the foot of
the building in front, and looking intently at the flames as they
issued through the top, he gave way to an innate propensity, which
anatomists have endeavoured to explain by two tubes leading from near
the palate to the ear, by keeping his mouth wide open; when some
melting lead descended and passed down his throat, which would
otherwise have glanced from his skin without occasioning the least
injury. This man, although he had advanced so far in life as to his
ninety-fourth year, lived several days, and without suffering much
pain. After his decease, a mass of lead weighing seven ounces, five
drams, and eighteen grains, little less than half a pound, was taken
from his stomach. See a communication by Mr. Edward Spry, Surgeon of
Plymouth, in the Philosophical Transaction, vol. XLIX. p. 459, and
vol. X. p. 673, of the Abridgment.

Notwithstanding this second disaster, the lessees under the Trinity
House were still resolved if possible to discharge their duty. They
applied in consequence to Lord Macclesfield, then President of the
Royal Society, who recommended the most eminent of our civil
engineers, with whom no one can be thought to compare, excepting
perhaps the late Mr. John Rennie.

Mr. Smeaton was in consequence of Lord Macclesfield’s recommendation
applied to by the proprietors, and most fortunately for mankind he
undertook the work.

Mr. Smeaton adopted the essential principle of his predecessor Mr.
Rudyard, by opposing weight to the force of the waves: but he made
improvements in many respects, by contriving a better figure, by more
completely uniting the work into one mass, and by discarding wood
altogether.

The construction and the dimensions of every part are given by Mr.
Smeaton in an elaborate work with plates; and it may be a sufficient
recommendation to say, that the greatest work of this kind executed
since his time, and by a most able engineer, that on the Bell Rock
near the Forth, is almost an exact copy of the Eddystone.

Mr. Bond, who visited the Eddystone on the 4th of August, 1788, has
given the following description of it in his History of Looe,
published in 1823.

     “Immediately opposite Looe church, fourteen miles off and
     visible from the parade and hills, is the Eddystone
     lighthouse, built by the late Mr. Smeaton of Yorkshire. The
     lantern is an octagon of about nine feet diameter. Till
     within a few years last past, it used to be lighted with
     twenty-four very large candles, sixteen in one round frame,
     and eight in another. Now Argand lamps are used, with highly
     polished reflectors. The candle light was not frequently
     seen from Looe by the naked eye: now the light is very
     strong, and in dark nights does not appear above a league
     distant.

     “At highwater the sea nearly embraces the base of the
     building. You ascend to the door by a ladder on the outside,
     almost perpendicular, according to my recollection, about
     fourteen staves long. You then arrive at the stairs within
     the building, which have, as no space can be lost, a coal
     place under them. The first room you come to is where the
     men keep their water, &c.; the next is a store room, where
     they keep their provisions, candles, &c. Round the room is
     engraved, as in relief, “Except the Lord keep the house,
     they labour but in vain that build it.” From this room you
     ascend to the next, which is the kitchen, by a ladder which
     goes up into a circular hole in the centre of the room. A
     large copper cover, like that of a saucepan, is placed to
     prevent falling through. You ascend to the next room, which
     is the bed room, in the same manner, this room is about
     twelve feet diameter. You next ascend in like manner into
     the lanthorn, which has a seat round it. Outside the
     lanthorn is a walk railed in round it. The view from hence
     is singularly and awfully grand, and perhaps has not its
     like. On the outside of the lanthorn are engraved the
     cardinal points of the compass, and over the door, “24th
     August, 1759.――Laus Deo.”

The village of Cawsand in this parish gives name to a bay, which
before the construction of the artificial reef, afforded the only
shelter in Plymouth Sound.

  Rame measures 1296 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          2,872    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           333   15    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    904   |    978   |     807    |    896
    giving a decrease of one per cent. in 30 years, with great
      fluctuations in the middle period, in consequence of the
      differences round Plymouth between war and peace.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Thomas Hunt Ley, presented by the Earl of
    Mount Edgcumbe in 1824.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is principally composed of strata of red and greenish-grey
slate, inclosing here and there beds of a compact quartzose rock.
These rocks are all similar to those of St. Anthony, and to those in
the cliff under Mount Edgcumbe, and at Saltash; but whether they
belong to the calcareous series, or to a more recent one associated
with the fossilliferous limestone of Plymouth, remains to be
ascertained.




REDRUTH.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Redruth is situated in the hundred of Penwith, and is bounded to the
east and north by Illogan, to the east by St. Agnes, to the south by
Gwenap and Stithians. This town and parish takes its name from ryd, a
ford, and ruth, red, the red ford, from its being a ford over a river
so coloured by the tin works round it. [Ryd (C.) is a ford, as
ryd-helik is the Willow-ford; and rydh, rud (C.) is red, as pedn-rydh
is red-headed. W.]

It is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book at £19. 11_s._ but by the
Bishop’s Book, £20. The patronage in John Pendarves Basset, esq. in
right of his manor of Tehidy, which extendeth itself all over this
parish; the incumbent Mr. Hugh Ley. (dead in 1734, now Mr. John
Collins.) All the lands in this parish are within the royalty, and
held from the manor of Tehidy. I shall begin with


THE MANOR OF REDRUTH,

properly so called, which comprehends the town of the same name, and
part of the parish, but not entire, and intermixed with several other
gentlemen’s lands.

This manor is now divided between three lords, the Right Hon. Henry
Earl of Radnor, John Hawkins, D. D. (by purchase lately from Francis
Scobell, esq. as heir of Tredenham), and Reginald Haweis of Kelliow,
esq.


THE TOWN OF REDRUTH.

This was formerly so inconsiderable as to be wholly past in Mr.
Carew’s Survey; who indeed is so much in haste in the whole hundred of
Penwith, that he seems to be like a weary traveller, glad to come to
his journey’s end. But this town is of late years grown very
considerable, and its market the greatest in the West, especially for
corn. It owes its rise to the great confluence of people drawn
together by the mines of tin and copper, with which it is surrounded;
yet it must have been in former days of some note, since in the reign
of Edward the Third, William Basset of Tyhiddy, got a patent from that
king, to keep “duo mercata” weekly, “et duas ferias annuatim” here.
But whether it did not turn to account, or however it was, the market
was neglected, and only the two fairs kept, which still continue in
that family.

John Buller, of Morval, esq. being trustee for Francis Basset, esq.
and finding such an old patent lying neglected among Mr. Basset’s
papers, (as I have heard the late Mr. Basset often say,) took out a
new patent from Oliver Cromwell (which he got afterwards confirmed by
King Charles the Second), for one market weekly on Friday, and another
additional fair on ――――. And the better to colour the matter, [he]
took it in the name of his nephew Francis Buller of Shillingham, esq.
grandson to the above-mentioned John Buller, in whom the whole estate
is centred.

The town of Redruth consists chiefly of one large street, near half a
mile in length, and in it are several fair buildings, the principal
inhabitants being Mr. John Cock, Mr. Anthony Cock, Mr. Paul Michell,
Mr. Richard Banbury, &c. many of which live upon their own land. At
the bottom of the great street, near the river, was the chapel, where
service was performed twice a week within the memory of some living;
but now it is unroofed, and the bell carried to Trefusis, it lying in
Mr. Trefusis’s land.

The family of Trengove, alias Nance, have several houses and lands in
and about this town, which being annexed to their manor of Penwinnick
and Melgisy, are now enjoyed by Chester Nance, esq.; as had likewise
the family of Pendarves, which were sold by Sir William Pendarves, not
long before his death, to Samuel Harris, gent. of the family of Park
in St. Clement’s, whose son ―――― Harris now enjoys them. So had too
the family of Haweis, who are very antient in the parish; and I have
been told that Mr. Haweis of Kelliow is descended from a younger son
of this family, but the eldest by a second marriage, to whom came a
third of the manor, and several good estates adjacent. Their
dwelling-house here, now turned to several tenements, was sold about
thirty years since to Mr. Richard Remfry, by David Haweis, gent.
father to the present; and his grandson, Mr. John Hussey, now enjoys
it. John Collins of Treworgan, esq. hath likewise an estate here, and
was born in this town. The estate came by his mother.

Adjoining to the south of the town is


THE MANOR OF TRERUFF.

Abundance of good tin and copper hath been lately dug out of this
manor, chiefly out of a mine called Pedenandre; the present lord of
which is Robert Trefusis, esq.


Next is the MANOR OF TOLLGUS, which I take to signify the hole in the
wood, though there [be] but little [of wood] there at present.
[Toll-gus, like Tol-verne and Bar-gus before, is Tol (C.) and Kuz
(C.), the high wood. W.]

The first place of note in it, is Treworthey, i. e. a house on an
hedge, suitable to its situation. This has been long in lease, the
seat of the Haweises, and is now so of David Haweis, gent. whom I
could only wish male issue to, which might inherit his many good
qualities.

Next is Tollgus [itself], which gives name to the manor, and was
lately the seat of Richard Remfry, gent. an eminent attorney; who
having buried his two sons (the eldest of which, Henry Remfry, esq.
was a barrister at law), left this to his grandson, by his eldest
daughter, John Hussey, gent. who now enjoys it. This manor was
anciently Tregian’s, and came as you may see in Golden to Grosse, and
is now vested in John Francis Buller, esq.


THE MANOR OF TRELEIGH.

Id est, the dwelling place, lies adjoining to Tollgus, the river only
parting them. The barton hereof hath been for three generations the
seat of that most ancient family of Pollard, being the chief stock
from whence all the others of that name were descended, which is now
extinct by the death of the late John Pollard, esq. who died at his
lodgings in London, Oct. 25, 1731, leaving only one daughter Margaret,
yet unmarried, having buried a few years before two very hopeful sons,
Hugh and John, both grown to men.

Yet I cannot leave this place without paying a due respect to the
memory of my deceased friend, and saying that for quick natural parts,
integrity, and true endeavours to serve to the utmost of his power
those whom he pretended friendship to, he hath but few surviving
equals. Some time before his death he purchased the manor (which is
but a small thing) from Richard Erisey, esq. whose family had been
[latterly the lords] of it, and their memory is still preserved in a
tenement in it called Park Erisey.

This barton hath produced of late years vast quantities of tin and
copper, though but little to the advantage of its owner, who had the
misfortune to have his good nature too much abused by a parcel of
villains he intrusted to his ruin. To the south of Treleigh, are a
long row of houses belonging to the barton, on a level piece of ground
called Plain an Guary [a level for sports], from a round in the middle
of it for a public playing place.

The church lieth near a quarter of a mile out of the town, at the very
western extremity of the parish, with a profitable glebe round it. In
anno 1291, 20 Edw. I. (Tax. Ben.) it was valued at 50_s._ having never
been appropriated.


THE EDITOR.

The church of this parish stands about half a mile south-west from the
town, and is wholly modern; having been constructed on the exact
situation of the former, so as to adopt its handsome and
well-proportioned tower. The new church was built about the middle of
the last century, when attention to propriety in adapting
architectural designs to their respective uses, civil or religious,
seems to have been at its lowest state of depression. This and the
church at Helston, constructed nearly about the same time, present in
the interior one large room, much more resembling a gymnasium for
training cavalry, than a place for religious worship.

This parish, with Crowan and Lelant, are dedicated to St. Uny, or St.
Unine, of whom nothing is known, and therefore conjecture represents
this saint as one of the missionaries from Ireland. The advowson of
the rectory is appurtenant to the honor and manor of Tehidy, which has
been in the Basset family since early times of the Plantagenets.

In the town a chapel has very recently been built, probably near to
the spot where the one formerly stood, that was dedicated to St.
Rumon, of whom little more is known than of St. Uny.

The abbey of Tavistock was dedicated to the honor of Almighty God, in
the names of the Blessed Virgin and of St. Rumon, by Ordgar Earl of
Devonshire, about the year 960, and confirmed by King Ethelred about
twenty years after. In Leland’s Collectanea de Rebus Britannicis, vol.
IV. p. 152, are noticed the following heads of a Life of Rumon:

     “Rumonus genere fuit Scotus Hiberniensis. Nemea sylva in
     Cornubia plenissima olim ferarum. Sanctus Rumonus faciebat
     sibi oratorium in sylva Nemæa Falemutha. Ordulphus Dux
     Cornubiæ transtulit ossa Rumoni Tavestochiam.”

Doctor Butler says of this saint:

     “William of Malmesbury informs us, that the History of St.
     Rumon’s life was destroyed by the wars, a misfortune he says
     that has also happened on other occasions in England.

     “He was a bishop, although it is not known of what see; his
     veneration was famous at Tavistock in Devonshire, where
     Ordulf, Earl of Devonshire, built a church under his
     invocation, before the year 960. Wilson, upon information
     given him by certain persons of that country, inserted his
     name on this day (January the 4th) in the second edition of
     his English Martyrology.”

Since there seems to be very little probability in the supposition
that the name of this parish can have reference to the Druids; and as
two strong objections may be alleged against its being derived from a
ford of red water, from the absence of any red stream, or ford; is it
too hardy to conjecture, that with variations in the orthography, and
in the pronunciation of the name, and perhaps with some adjunct
syllable, the long-sought-for etymology may be found in a patron
saint, when three other parishes, Ruan Major, Ruan Minor, and Ruan
Lanihorn, are dedicated to his name.

In consequence of the immense extension of workings on lodes of copper
all round the northern and eastern junctions of the forest granite,
with the killas or slate, the town of Redruth has grown into a large
size, and into considerable opulence. The main street is rendered
splendid on both sides by continued lines of shops, and the market on
Friday is supplied in great abundance with every thing that can be
wanted in the ordinary concerns of life. Large quantities of fish, of
pork, and of home manufactures, especially of shoes, are brought from
Penzance market, held on the preceding day, so that the road over
Hayle Causeway is thronged with carts throughout the intervening
night; and the long street of Redruth is scarcely adequate to contain
the people who come there from all these populous mining districts,
although a new and spacious market place has been constructed within
about thirty years, on the south side of the main street, in which all
the standings were previously fixed. Much more recently a bell tower
and clock have been added, by the liberality of the late Lord
Dunstanville.

To the northward of Redruth, and running nearly parellel with it, lies
the village of Plengwary, a name undoubtedly connected with the
Amphitheatre or Round, which, till within half a century, remained
distinctly marked adjacent to it. See Doctor Borlase’s Antiquities,
second edition, p. 208; and his Natural History, p. 297, and all that
is stated on this subject respecting the Round in Perran Zabuloe.

That gwary means a play or exhibition of games and sports, cannot
admit of a doubt. In Lhuyd’s Archæologia Britannica, theatrum is
rendered in Cornish guardy. But Mr. Tonkin’s exposition of the first
syllable, plan or plen, by flat, level, is very doubtful, being
founded perhaps on no other basis than an accidental coincidence in
sound with an English word. This village, frequently called Little
Redruth, is not only grown into a town, but extends so as almost to
join the larger portion.

A curious document relative to this parish was placed in my hands by
the Rev. Samuel Gurney, during thirty-two years vicar of St. Erth, and
for many years preceding curate of Redruth.

The paper has the following attestation:

     Taken from the original, by me, William Rowle, 28th
     November, 1772.

                    Redruth 1500.

     The copy of a muster book for the said parish made in the
     year aforesaid, and now in the custody of Richard Crane,
     esq. Camborn, captain.[13]

     24 light horse, and six men to carry meat, and them
     appointed victuallers; the rest where [wear] bows and
     arrows.

     John Nacothan, senior, doth horse and harness Thomas Renfry.

     Richard Michell doth horse and harness Henry Jenkin.

     Thomas Polkenhorn doth horse and harness John Raile.

     John Robert Lytho doth horse and harness John Robert Vean.

     John Torleh doth horse and harness George Monhure.

     Edy Webber doth horse and harness Sondry Renfry.

     John West doth horse and harness Richard Clemowe.

     Regnald Trevingy doth horse and harness Perkin Jenkin.

     John Davie doth horse and harness Henry Gwihter.

     John Hawes doth horse and harness Thomas Perre.

     Thomas Sondry doth horse and harness Richard Vivian.

     John Roben doth horse and harness John Stephens.

     Thomas Andrews doth horse and harness himself.

     Richard John Rawe doth horse and harness himself.

     Henry Refry doth horse and harness himself.

     Thomas Cocke doth horse and harness himself.

     John Henry Woolcock doth horse and harness himself.

     George Brend doth horse and harness himself.

     Nicholas Rogers doth horse and harness himself.

     Pasco James doth horse and harness himself.

     Richard Angove doth horse and harness himself.

     John Hack doth horse and harness himself.

     In all 24 men, with horses, weapons, harness, and
     victuallers for the same.

     (Signed) William George, Richard Andrew, Thomas Webber,
     Thomas Oppie, David Warren, Henry Gwiator.


On the same paper is the following:

     Memorandum.――In the year 1697 there was in Cornwall a great
     dearth of corn. Wheat was sold at 39 or 40 shillings per
     bushel (the treble Winchester bushel, or 24 gallons); Barley
     at 28 shillings per bushel, on Saturday the 27th August, at
     Helstone, being their market day. On the next market day the
     barley was sold for 7 or 8 shillings per buhels.

       *     *     *     *     *

This array was made three years subsequent to the Cornish
insurrection, when Michel Joseph and Thomas Flammock led their
followers to Blackheath in Kent.

       *     *     *     *     *

Having omitted to notice in its proper place under Illuggan, the very
remarkable coincidence between the measurements of former times and of
our own, in respect to the honor and manor of Tehidy, it will not be
improper to do so here.

The Cornish, in adopting the Saxon word acre (æcer) applied it in the
most extraordinary manner, either through utter ignorance of its
meaning, or from an absurd attempt to designate by this term a
previously existing measure of their own, between two and three
hundred times as large.

The Saxon acre in its true extent, was however adopted afterwards in
Cornwall, consisting of one hundred and sixty square poles, each
eighteen feet long. The Normans for some reason quite unknown, reduced
the length of the pole from eighteen to sixteen feet and a half, and
thus established the difference between Saxon or customary, and Norman
or statute acres. They differ in the proportion 18 squared to 16½
squared, or as 12 squared to eleven squared, that is as 144 to 121. As
6 to 5 for any approximate conversion, and as 25 to 21 very nearly.
This Saxon acre continues, up to the present time, in very general use
throughout Cornwall, and is the measure by which woodlands are
estimated in most parts of England.

The absurdly denominated old Cornish acre, is believed to contain 280
Norman acres.

Mr. Carew, fo. 46 of the original edition, p. 131 of Lord
Dunstanville’s, gives the measurement in these Cornish acres, of
various manors and lands as they were returned before the King’s
Justices at Launceston, in the 12th year of the reign of Edward the
First, A. D. 1284, where the very first article is Decunar. de Tihidi,
seventy. Now 70 multiplied by 280, give 19,600 Norman or statute acres.

Mr. Hitchins’s measurement gives for

  Illuggan        8,028 acres
  Camborne        5,933
  Redruth         3,763
                 ――-----
                 17,724;

and the manor extends into Crowan: so that if a nearer coincidence
were required, land might probably be found there sufficient to
complete the exact amount.

The abbreviation “Decunar.” stands in Mr. Carew’s list before de
Tehidi; but no word beginning with these letters can be found either
in Spelman’s Glossary, or in that of Ducange.

It is impossible for me to turn away from this incidental mentioning
of Tehidy, without adding, that scarcely had the press closed on the
notes respecting Illuggan, containing a most imperfect and inadequate
tribute to the virtues, to the manly character, to the liberality and
steady private friendship of its proprietor, then in a state of bodily
affliction demanding the commiseration of every one, when the final
scene of life came to an end, and he was no more. The event took place
on the 5th of February, 1835.

Lord Dunstanville now claims neither our commiseration nor our pity:
he has nobly performed the part assigned him by Providence, and we
doubt not is receiving the just reward; but by an unanimous impulse
the whole population of Cornwall have resolved on recording to future
ages, not so much his merits, for that would be superfluous, as their
own high sense, consciousness, and estimation of them; and not without
the hope that such memorials may tend to excite all persons in their
different stations and degrees of life to emulate examples so
recorded. Meetings have in consequence been assembled, and
contributions made, amply sufficient for placing a monument on
Carnbre, a part of Tehidy manor, and visible from the house; on a hill
the most romantic of any in the west of Cornwall, venerated as a seat
of the religion of our remote forefathers, and now about to be truly
consecrated by the spontaneous tribute of a whole country, to the
merits of a great and good man.

The families chief proprietors of land in Redruth are:

Basset――High lands of the whole parish, as a part of the manor and
honor of Tehidy, and possessed of some part in demesne.

Trefusis.

Buller, through the family of Grosse.

The representatives of the late Mr. J. M. Knighton of Greenofen, in
the parish of Whitechurch near Tavistock.

Doctor William Pryce, author of the Mineralogia Cornubiensis, one vol.
folio, 1778, and of the Archæologia Cornu-Britannica, one vol. quarto,
1790, practised here as a physician, and was, I believe, a native of
the place. He took a considerable part in first making Portreath a
safe harbour for coasting vessels, from whence Railways are now
extended to all the neighbouring mines.

  Redruth measures 3763 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           7631    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          2482    2    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {   4924   |   5903   |    6607    |   8191
    giving an increase of 66 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. J. Webster Hawksley, presented by Lady
    Basset in 1835.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

A small triangular portion, forming the extreme southern part of this
parish, rests on granite, as does also an irregular tract on the
south-eastern boundary; but all the remainder, that is by far the
greater part of the parish, is situated on felspathic rocks, belonging
to the porphyritic series, which are very metalliferous, constituting,
with similar rocks in Camborne and Gwennap (all surrounding the same
central mass of granite) the most important mining district in
Cornwall.


     [13] The Cranes (of Crane) are noticed by the Heralds as
     residing in Camborn for five descents previously to 1620.
     Their arms, Argent, a crane Sable, on a perch raguly Vert.




ROACH OR ROCHE.


HALS.

Roach is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the north St.
Wenn and Withell, east Luxsillian, South St. Austell, West St. Dennis.
For the name, in old Gaulish British it signifies a rock of stone, not
unsuitable to the natural circumstances of this place; where, on a
level piece of ground, stands the loftiest single ragged rock this
county can shew, at least thirty foot high, and by it several other
rocks of less magnitude.

In the Domesday Book, 20 William I. 1087, this district was partly
taxed under the jurisdiction of Tre-roach, that is the rock town, now
Tre-garrek, or Trecarrek, (i. e. the rock town, also in Cornish,) the
voke lands of the still notable manor or lordship here so called; from
whence may be inferred, that before the Norman Conquest here was an
endowed rectory church, called Roch (i. e. Rock), and the village
adjoining, still Roach Town, and Roach Church Town.

Moreover, in the inquisition of the bishops of Lincoln and Winchester,
into the value of Cornish Benefices, 1294, Ecclesia de Rupe, in
decanatu de Powdre, i. e. after the Latin, the church of the Rock, or
the Rock church, was valued £6. 6_s._ 8_d._

In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, the rectory of Roach was valued in £20.
The patronage in coparcenary between Arundell of Lanherne and Heart
alternately, (by a title derived from the heirs of De Rupes, or
Roaches, who endowed it). The incumbent Treweeke. This parish was
rated to the four shillings per pound Land Tax for one year, 1696,
£147. 13_s._ 6_d._

Moreover, in this parish, whereof I treat, upon the top of the stony
rock before mentioned, is still extant the moorstone walls, durnes,
and windows (the roof long since dilapidated or demolished by time),
an ancient chapel for divine service; though now, by reason the old
stone stairs ascending thereto are pulled down by the tenants of the
manor aforesaid, and converted to common uses, the access thereto is
very difficult and dangerous. The wall consists of about twenty feet
in length, ten feet in height, and about twelve in breadth; one part
of it is cut by art out of the natural rock, about thirty feet high
from the ground; the other part built of lime and stone, so strong and
curious, that neither time, wind, nor weather can yet disfigure it. In
its garret over, as appears by the beam holes, there was formerly a
lodge or planchin (both which as aforesaid, long since, with the roof,
are fallen to the ground). In this chapel wall is towards the east a
large moorstone window where the altar stood, with a moorstone door or
durns on the south for entrance, and another such door leading to the
west, through which you are brought out into a little garden plot and
tye-pit on the Rock, that overlooks the country many miles round. Who
built this chapel, whether the De Rupes, lords thereof, or others, it
is not recorded, nor at what time. But most certain it is, that from
this stone rock, the chapel, church, and parish have the denomination
Roach.

Mr. Carew in his Survey of Cornwall, p. 139, (p. 324 Lord
Dunstanville’s edit.) tells us, that near this rock there is another,
which having a pit in it, containeth water, which ebbs and flows as
the sea doth. I was thereupon very curious to inspect this matter, and
found it was only a hole artificially cut in a stone about twelve
inches deep and six broad; wherein, after rayne, a pool of water
stands; which, afterwards with fair weather vanisheth away and is
dried up; and then again on the falling of rain water is replenished
accordingly; which, with dry weather, abates as aforesaid (for upon
those occasions I have seen it to have water in its pit, and again to
be without it), which doubtless gave occasion to the feigned report
that it ebbs and flows as the sea: of all which premisses thus speaks
Mr. Carew further out of the Cornish Wonder-Gatherer:

  You neighbour-scorners, holy, proud,
      Goe people Roache’s cell,
  Far from the world and neer to the Heavens;
      There, hermitts, may you dwell.
  Is’t true the Springe in Rock hereby
      Doth tidewise ebb and flowe;
  Or have we fooles with lyars met?
      Fame says its, be it soe.

The last tradition of this hermitage chapel is, that when it was kept
in repair, a person diseased with a grievous leprosy, was either
placed or fixed himself therein, where he lived till the time of his
death, to avoid infecting others; who was daily attended with meat,
drink, washing, and lodging, by his daughter, named Gunett or Gundred;
and the well hereby from whence she fetched water for his use is to
this day shown, and called by the name of St. Gunett’s well, for St.
Gundred’s well.

Tre-Roach, alias Tregarreck, i. e. the Rock town as aforesaid, before
the Norman Conquest was in the possession of an old British family,
from thence denominated Treroach, afterwards surnamed De Rupe or De
Rupes after the Latin; and again, after the Gaulish French De Roach,
i. e. of the rock: of which family Ralph de Rupe held in Cornwall by
tenure of knight service three knight’s fees of land, tempore Richard
I. 1189.――Mr. Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 49. That is to say, for a
man to bear arms in defence of his country was the tenure thereof:
viz. at his own proper cost and charges.

Tremoderet en Hell, in this parish, i. e. Aunt’s Hall Town, a place
heretofore notable for its hall, was the vokelands of a considerable
manor in Roach, taxed in the Domesday Book 1087 (near which is yet to
be seen the ruins of Sacra-fons, or Holywell, free chapel or burying
place); which formerly was the lands of Bodrigan, who forfeited it by
attainder of treason on the part of Richard III. against King Henry
VII. who settled it by an entail gift upon his privy councillor Sir
Richard Edgcumb, knight, whose posterity are now in full possession
thereof.

Hens, alias Hains Burrow, i. e. old ancient graves or tumuli, situate
upon the confines of this parish and St. Austell, being the highest
mountain or pyramid or promontory of land in Cornwall, upon the top of
which unparalleled great tumulus or burying place was the Cornish Avoh
Bicken, becken, or beacon; that is to say, the signal, the bakininge
watchhouse, or proclamation house; wherein, in times of war, one
person was lodged to discover the approach of enemies’ fleets of ships
on the sea coasts of Cornwall, and from this place he overlooked part
of the Irish sea, Atlantic ocean, and British channel; who,
accordingly on the discovery of enemies, was to set fire to his little
hut of combustible materials wherein he slept and resided, to give
notice, alarm the people, and to make signal, beconinge, or
proclamation, to all other bickens to do the like. For heretofore
every other parish in Cornwall, upon the highest lands of their said
parish, had one of those bickens, beckeners, or beacons, for the same
end and purposes. Now those words bicken, becken, beacon, in British,
are synonymous, and signify to becken, cry out, to publish, to make
known, or to proclaim any matter or thing. (See also Floyd on the word
Proclamation.) Of this Hainsburrow Bicken. Mr. Carew, in his Survey of
Cornwall, out of the Cornish Wonder-Gatherer, supplies me with those
rhymes:--

  Haynes-burrow’s wide prospect at once
    Both feeds and glutts your eye;
  With Cornwall’s whole extent, as it
    In length and breadth doth lye.

Note further, that at coll-freth, i. e. strong neck or promontory of
land, is the ruins of an old decayed Christian or Druidan chapel,
under the walls of which is a well of pure, rapid, and chrystalline
water, not far from Pen-ta-vale Fenton aforesaid.

Note also, that haine in French is hatred, strife, contention.

In the side of this mountain or promontory of land, under a rush bush
in the Downes, is the original fountain of water called in British
Pen-ta-vale Fenton; that is to say, the head, sacred, or consecrated
vale, or valley well, or spring of water; from whence in Ptolemy, the
Greek Geographer, Anno Dom. 140, we have Valubia and Cornwalia; as
from it also we have the old name of Grampound Burrough, coyt-vala;
that is, the vale wood, or wood on the river vale, part of which wood
is still extant. Also the name of the priory of St. Mary de Vale,
formerly in St. Anthony parish in Powdre; as also the name of the
famous harbour of Fal or Vale Mouth, known heretofore to Phœnicians,
Greeks, and Romans, under the names of ικτα, Ikta, cove, or
harbourgood, and, οςτει, Ostei; οςτειονες, Osteiones; that is, the
mouth or entrance into the promontory of Cornvaile, or the Vale river.

In this parish, at ――――, liveth Mr. John Keen, a surgeon, who hath
by his skill and care in his profession got himself considerable
reputation and riches thereby,


TONKIN.

St. Roach, in the hundred of Powder, hath to the west St. Dennis and
St. Stephen, to the north Great St. Columb, St. Wen, and Withiell, to
the east Lanivet and Luxilian, to the south St. Austell.

This parish takes its name from, and is dedicated to St. Roche, born
at Montpelier in France, of which city his father was lord. After his
father and mother were dead, though but then twenty years of age, he
took a resolution to dispose of part of his estate, which he
distributed amongst the poor, left the administration of the remainder
to his uncle, and from a prince became a pilgrim. He took the way to
Rome, and both in his journey thither, and in that city, cured several
people of the plague, by making only the sign of the cross. Being at
last attacked by it himself, he withdrew into a wood, where a
neighbouring gentleman’s dog brought him every day a loaf of bread; at
last, being cured, he returned to his own country, but it being in
troublesome times, he was taken up for a spy, and by his uncle (who
did not know him) shut up in prison, where he suffered incredible
evils; and dying there in 1327, he was at last discovered by a writing
found about him. The church celebrates his memory the 16th of August.
[But this parish was called Roch before this saint was born, without
the addition of saint; for it is named De Rupe in Taxat. Ben. 1291,
from its remarkable rock, and was then dedicated to St. Conant, whose
memory is still preserved by his well on Trefrank, his park and meadow
corruptly called St. Gonnet’s. W.]

It is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book, £20. 0_s._ 0_d._; the
patronage in the heirs of Sir John Arundell; the incumbent Mr.
Treweek, dead in 1733, now Mr. John Tregenna, Rector of Mawgan in
Pider, who holds them both together by [dispensation,] having bought
the perpetual patronage of three times out of four from Lord Arundell,
[which was sold again by his daughters and heirs to a Society in
London, self-combined for the laudable purpose of purchasing the
advowsons of livings, to confer them on religious clergymen. And on
the death of Mr. Tregenna in 1754, the representatives for the Society
nominated Samuel Furley, M.A. the present rector, the sale of the
patronage having been so far completed as to belong to the Society,
and yet not so far as to enable it legally to present. W.]

This parish was valued (Tax. Ben.) in anno 1291, 20 Edw. I. at £6.
6_s._ 8_d._ having never been appropriated.

There being several manors in this parish, I shall begin with one of
the largest extent, royalties, &c. viz. the manor of Tregarick, so
called by corruption [rather by the customary variation of a letter in
composition, from carick, a rock, the dwelling of the rock, as having
in it the famous great rock, which (as is said above) gave the name to
this parish. W.] This was antiently the seat of a family of the same
name, whose pedigree I have not been able to recover, or to say any
more of them, than that John Tregarrek was knight of the shire, 7
Richard II.; [and that] the last of them, ―――― Tregarick, left only
one daughter and heir, Matilda, married to Ralph Trenowth of
Fentongollan, esq. anno ――――, by whom she had only one daughter and
heir Johanna, who as being heir to her mother, carried this manor to
her husband, Hugh Boscawen of Tregothnan, esq. anno ―――― [about 1400,
see Peerage.] Ever since which it hath been in the possession of this
family, the Lord Viscount Falmouth being the present lord thereof.

[Authors cannot always draw conclusions from their own premises: we
have an instance of this here. The parish of Roch has no relation to
the noble pilgrim of France. It was called Roch before this saint was
born; and the saint of the church was St. Conant, whose memory is
still preserved by his well on Trefrank, his park and meadow,
corruptly called St. Gonnet’s. But this saint was afterwards
superseded by a more modern one, a nameless one, who, actuated with
the spirit of the pilgrim in France, renounced the world, retired to
this rock, built a small house of stone upon a point at one end of it,
and there spent his days in hermetical devotions. The house is still
entire in the shell of it, having a small sort of common window at the
outer end of it, and a little flat for a garden upon one side; this,
from its proximity to the church and church town, was very near to the
haunts of men for a hermitage, but it was raised upon a most
extraordinary mass of rock, that here rises upon the ridge of a heath
in a rough and huge kind of carcass, and spreads in its large limbs to
a considerable distance along the heath. On a tall and pillar-like
spire of this rock, ascendible only by a ladder, is the hermitage, and
the view from it must have been then, not much more wild and savage
than it is at present; the house and lands of Tregarick being just
under it. Indeed, the hermitage must have been built by the family
itself, as it is planted upon their ground. Even one of the family I
suppose was the very hermit. Nor could it have been constructed for
this purpose at any period earlier than 1291, as appears from the
Valor of Edward, which calls the parish only Roche, and knows of no
saint of the name; the look of the whole building, and the form of the
window particularly, concur to fix the hermit probably as late as the
year 1400, and to mark him perhaps for the last of the Tregaricks.
Deprived of all male issue, he perhaps grew disgusted with the world,
resigned up his mansion and his estate to his daughter, and devoted
himself for the remainder of his life to poverty, to sequestration,
and to prayer; and from the natural tendency of mankind to revere
those virtues of self-denial and devoutness in others, which they are
too gross and too indulgent to practise themselves; he became revered
in his life, he was canonized after his death, and the parish took its
denomination from its native saint, its saint of the rock, and its own
St. Roche, preferring him to its old saint, Conant, and for his sake
attaching the name of saintship to its old name of Roche. W.]


THE EDITOR.

Roach rock and tower are very conspicuous objects. The tower, like
some others in that neighbourhood, is lofty and without pinnacles.

The rock is in itself the most remarkable object in all that range of
crystaline formations, and it is crowned by the building described by
Mr. Hals, which bears every appearance of having been the cell of an
anchorite, a Stylites, or pillar saint, so far as this climate would
admit. Mr. Lysons, but without quoting any authority, says it was
dedicated to St. Michael. Mr. Whitaker, clearly drawing on the
resources of his own fancy, has transformed Gunett or Gundred, the
traditionary daughter of the Leper who retired to this place, into a
masculine saint, whom he names St. Conant, and to whom Mr. Whitaker
says, that not only the hermitage but the church is dedicated.

As Mr. Whitaker and Mr. Lysons have failed of producing any document,
or of alleging any tradition worthy of the smallest reliance, it may
fairly be concluded that nothing is known with respect to the origin
or specific use of this cell. It may therefore have been constructed
as they think, by some proprietor of a neighbouring estate impelled by
the insane mythology then in fashion, for it cannot be called
religion; and afterwards, as appears to have been the case in various
other situations, it may have been used for a place of penitentiary
exile from St. Petrock’s Monastery. Mr. Lysons has given a perspective
view, and an exact plan of this building, accompanied by measurements,
from which it appears to be 14 feet 8 inches long, by 10 feet 6 inches
wide, and the wall about 2 feet 3 inches thick, except at the
south-eastern end, where the wall is laid down 3 feet 6 inches. No one
can wish to see this building again appropriated to its former
superstitious purposes; but it may be a fair subject of regret, that
such a remnant of antiquity should not be protected from injury by the
addition of a roof.

Mr. Treweeke, the incumbent mentioned by Mr. Hals, was succeeded by
Mr. John Tregenna, who held also the rectory of Mawgan in Pider, and
on his decease in 1754, the Rev. Samuel Furley was nominated by a
Society in London, who had purchased this and other livings,
especially in populous places, for the avowed purpose of inculcating
specific religious opinions. At Roach it is understood that benefit
has resulted to the inhabitants from these appointments, and certainly
no clergyman could be more exemplary in the discharge of his parochial
duties, or more liberal in his conduct, than the able and intelligent
individual and excellent scholar who, to the regret of the whole
neighbourhood, has recently retired from the arduous care of a flock,
consisting chiefly of stream-work miners, the least cultivated portion
of a class of men, in general much exceeding the average population of
this kingdom in general knowledge, and consequent good conduct, in
relation to their duties both in public and in private life.

Yet, notwithstanding this instance, the Editor cannot but think that
such a system of mortmain for making church patronage permanently
subservient to self-constituted bodies, as the medium for giving
currency to peculiar doctrines, thus erecting mere wealth into an
hierarchy as well as an aristocracy in this kingdom, requires a
prohibition from the legislature; more especially as the desire and
the zeal for acquiring proselytes have been found in all times, in all
nations, and under every form of religion, not to bear a very strict
relation either to the soundness of doctrine, or to the virtues such
doctrine may be likely to produce.

It is clearly impossible that this parish can have been dedicated to
St. Roche, since the name occurs in the Valuation of Pope Nicholas
made about the year 1291, where, under the Deanery of Pouder, stands:
Ecclesia de Roupe, Taxatio, £6. 6_s._ 8_d._ Decima, 12_s._ 8_d._ while
St. Roche is said to have died in 1327, forty-six years afterwards;
and if that were not sufficient, the name occurs in the Domesday
Survey made two hundred years before the time of Pope Nicholas, and
two hundred and fifty before that of the saint.

The similarity of the sounds――parish of the Rock, and parish of St.
Roche,――may have occasioned a subsequent adoption of this saint: of
whom it is stated, from the very scanty materials remaining to make
out his life, that having left Montpellier, the place of his birth, to
proceed on a pilgrimage to Rome, he encountered the plague at the city
of Placentia; that not obtaining any assistance or human help, after
that most dreadful disease had manifested itself on his person, he got
into a wood where dogs miraculously afforded him all the aid in their
power, after a manner suggested by the parable of Lazarus. Getting
well, he bestowed on others in the town that help which had been
refused to himself; and fully satisfied with this effort on behalf of
humanity, he returned into France, and spent the remainder of his life
in idleness and solitude.

He is fervently adored, and his aid entreated, over France and Italy,
as the individual to whom Almighty God has delegated the care and
superintendence of all cutaneous complaints or exterior ulcers; and it
is rather curious that throughout Cornwall a congeries of pimples is
denominated a roach up to the present time.

  This parish measures 6,080 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3989    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           577   17    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    954   |   1161   |    1425    |   1630
    giving an increase of 71 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Charles Lyne, presented by the Trustees in
    1833.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The grand geological feature of this interesting parish is the large
mass of granular shorl rock, which towers above the adjacent country.
It has all the appearance and form (so far as regards the mechanical
structure of this mass) of a projecting tor of granite, such as
commonly cap the most elevated hills in Cornwall: but a nearer
examination shows that it is a compound of shorl and quartz. This rock
is entirely surrounded by a felspathic slate, being about a mile
distant from the granite. St. Mewan Beacon is an instance of another
large tor of shorl rock, a notice of which was omitted under the head
of St. Mewan; this rock differs however from that of Roach in having a
base of compact crystalline quartz, throughout which the shorl is
disseminated in various proportions. Its position is also different,
for that rises immediately out of the granite.

The southern part of Roach parish reposes on granite; the remainder on
rocks of the porphyritic series. It corresponds in its geological
structure with the parish of St. Dennis.




RUAN LANIHORNE.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powder, and hath upon the north the river
Vale, east Kuby, south Verian, west Egles Ross or Philley. As for the
first name, if it be compounded of Ruan-Lawn-y-horne, it signifies the
iron oak grove rest, temple, or place of tranquillity and repose,
referring to the then natural circumstances of the place, heretofore
consisting of old decayed groves of oaks, whose withered tops were
like horne or iron: of which sort of timber Leland in his Itinerary
assures us the river Vale was surrounded. But if Ruan be a corruption
of, or derived from the Latin ruina, ruinæ, it signifies woe,
destruction, ruin, extreme decay, death, misery, loss, falling down,
danger, mischief. Note also, that ruo is to fall, rush, run headlong
with great violence, to subvert, overthrow, beat down, batter, or
destroy.

Probably at the time of the Norman Conquest this is that district
taxed in the Domesday Book under the name of Richan, otherwise under
the jurisdiction of Govile, Trethay, or Trefiles. In the inquisition
of the bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, into the value of Cornish
Benefices, 1294, it was rated by the name of Ecclesia de Largesshorne,
in decanatu de Powdre, cvi_s._ viii_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521,
by the name of Ruon, alias Laryhorne, i. e. the horn or iron learn or
erudition, £12. 0_s._ 0_d._ The patronage in ――――. The incumbent
Dell. By Largesshorne, Cornish-French, is signified an iron boon,
bounty, or liberality. This parish was rated to the four shillings per
pound Land Tax, 1696, by the name of Ruan Lannyhorne, £108. 11_s._
0_d._ as aforesaid. It is also vulgarly called Lary-horne, i. e. iron
floor or ground church; perhaps from the stone pavement of its floor.

Tregage, alias Tregago, alias Trejago, synonymous words, a place that
heretofore was the vokelands of a manor or tithing: which place gave
name and original to an old family of gentlemen, from thence after the
French mode surnamed de Tregago, or Trejago, some of which built
Trejago house and castle, situate upon the vale, creek, or river here,
and yet extant in this place, in the reigns of some of the first
Norman princes.

Note further, that Jago, Gago, in the Scotts and Irish tongues,
signifies, as innis and insula, an island, in British and Latin. (See
Floyd’s Scotts-Irish Dictionary.) Also that in this parish is the
manor dwelling called Tre-lonk, Tre-lonck, id est, the buttery or
house that hath store of food or provisions for housekeeping.


TONKIN.

Ruan Lanihorne is in the hundred of Powder, and is bounded to the west
by Philly, to the north by the river Fale, to the east by St. Cuby, to
the south by Verian.

In anno 1291, 20 Edward I. this church was valued at cvi_s._ vii_d._
having never been appropriated. As for the adjunct of Lan-y-horne, or
rather Hoarn, that is, the church of iron, I believe it took it from
the castle near it, as being in those times a place of great note and
strength with this castle, than as being the principal place in this
parish, and the seat of the patrons, I shall begin with the
description of it; which, though more properly Lanyhorne Castle, was
commonly called Ruan castle: it stood by the south of the church at no
great distance from it, the rectory house being between them, in a
pleasant situation enough, on the edge of a creek, into which a small
rivulet empties itself; and the river Fale, which is here of a
considerable breadth, when the tide is in, and surrounded formerly
with woods, which are now mostly destroyed. Leland gives account of
the state of it in his time: “from Tregony to passe doune by the body
of the haven of Falamuth, to the mouth of Lanyhorne creeke or hille,
on the south-est side of the haven, is a 2. miles. This creeke goith
up half a mile from the principale streame of the haven. At the bed of
this creeke standith the castelle of Lanyhorne, sumtyme a castel of 8.
 tourres, now decaying for lak of coverture; it longgid as principal
house to the Archedecons. These landes descendid by heires general to
the best Corbetes of Shropshir, and to Vaulx of Northamptonshir. Vaulx
part syns bought by Tregyon of Cornewaul.” By this one may guess what
a stately castle this formerly was; for in my time was only one tower
of the castle standing, which was so large, that if the others were
equal to it, the whole building must be of a prodigious magnitude; but
I fancy this was the body of the whole, for there is not room enough
about it for so great a pile: so that I believe the eight towers
mentioned by Leland were only turrets and appendages to this principal
part. I wish I had taken a draught of it in season (as I often
intended); for this too was pulled down in or about the year 1718, by
Mr. Grant, who having obtained leave from the lord to do it, erected
several houses with the materials, and turned it into a little town,
to which ships of about 80 or 100 tons come up, and supply the
neighbourhood with coals, timber, &c. as the barges do with sand. But
since the writing of this, I am informed that six of the eight towers
were standing within these thirty years, of which that which I have
mentioned, was the biggest and loftiest, as being at least fifty feet
in height. This belongs to the manor of Elerchy, of which I have given
a full account in St. Verian, in which the place which gives name to
it is seated, though the castle was no doubt the chief seat of its
lords. Thomas Le Archideakene was one of those that had £20 of land or
rent or more, 25th Edward I. He was knight in parliament for this
county, 33 Edward I. and the 6th, 7th, and 8th, of Edward II.; Sheriff
of the county in the 7th of the same king; summoned to the House of
Lords, 13th Edward II. This church is a rectory, value in the King’s
Book at £12.; patronage in Lord Hobart, as heir to Sir J. Maynard; the
incumbent, Mr. Canon Grant, who succeeded in 17―― Mr. John Dell, as he
did his father Henry.


THE EDITOR.

The parish church is situated on a creek flowing into the Tregony
branch of the Falmouth River, and has the appearance of much
antiquity. When Mr. Tonkin wrote, about a hundred and thirty years
ago, vessels of a size sufficient for enabling them to navigate the
open sea, came up this creek; but in common with many other similar
estuaries, it has become filled up with alluvial detritus from above,
and no longer admits even barges.

Near to the church stood a large and magnificent castle flanked by
eight towers, the residence of a very ancient family bearing the name
of Arcedekne.

Of this family, Thomas le Arcedekne was summoned to Parliament as a
Baron, in the 14th year of Edward the Second, A. D. 1321, as was his
son John le Arcedekne, in the 16th year of Edward the Third. This last
Baron left a son Warine le Arcedekne, who died, leaving three
daughters his coheirs. The arms of this family are stated by Mr.
Lysons to have been Argent, three chevronels Sable.

Of these daughters, Alice became the wife of Walter de Lacy; and her
coheiresses married into the families of Corbett and Vaux. The portion
of Vaux having been forfeited, was given in 1462 to Avery Cornburgh,
and afterwards belonged to the unfortunate Mr. Tregian. On the plunder
and confiscation of his property, it was purchased by Mr. Ezekiel
Grosse.

The manors of Lanihorne and Eleskey belong to Mr. and Mrs. Gregor, and
Mr. Lysons adds, that they were formerly held of the honor of
Launceston, by the annual render of a brace of greyhounds.

Treviles was the seat of the Lukes, of whom William Luke, esq. held
the situation of an admiral.

Mr. Whitaker has added to Mr. Tonkin’s manuscript a history of this
parish, sufficient in quantity to make a volume of itself, therefore
much too long for a portion of this work; and of which the Editor
would not attempt to make an abridgment, since the style discriminates
its author, and the detailed quotations from writers little known to
the generality of scholars, evince his learning and profound research.
Perhaps this example of parochial history may appear at some future
time in a substantive form; but whenever that is done, an addition
must be made to it of the most interesting and most important
circumstance connected with this parish:――the life of Mr. Whitaker
himself. It will therefore be sufficient to state here these short
particulars.

The Rev. John Whitaker was born in the year 1736, at Manchester; this
naturally induced him to write the history of that town, a work which
raised its author to a considerable elevation in literary fame. He
became a Fellow of Corpus Christi College in Oxford, and retired on
this living acquired for the college by purchase from the Earls of
Buckinghamshire, heirs of Sir John Maynard.

Soon after Mr. Whitaker’s arrival in Cornwall he married a lady,
heiress of the Tregennas, a family long distinguished in Cornwall, and
known throughout England by the fame of one of its members, a lawyer,
a wit, and a man of letters, in the reign of Charles the Second.

Mr. Whitaker died in November 1808, aged 73, and is buried in the
chancel of the parish church with this simple memorial:

  John Whitaker, B.D. Rector.
  Buried Nov. 14th, 1808, aged 73.

He left two daughters, one of whom is married to Richard Taunton, esq.
M.D. through whose kindness and liberality Mr. Hals’ manuscripts have
been placed in the Editor’s hands for publication.

Mr. Whitaker stands deservedly high in the estimation of the whole
literary world, as a man of superior talent, and as an able and
brilliant writer in the various departments of theology, politics,
biography, general history, and topography; besides these, he has left
sermons and opuscula, which, collected from the British Critic, and
from similar repositories, would fill several volumes, all able, but
strongly marked by impressions indicating the predominance of fancy,
and of an unshakeable determination to support every opinion once
entertained, without any reference to the solidity of the foundation
on which it may repose; thus stamping a character of dogmatism, which
in theological works would seem to be far better suited to a Church
claiming infallibility, than to one owing its very existence to
appeals made from authority to the exercise of private judgment.

In biography Mr. Whitaker, carried away by imagination and feeling,
has wasted the powers of his mind to “make the worse appear the better
reason, to perplex and dash maturest counsels,” in an elaborate and
learned effort to vindicate the character of one among the most
unprincipled and abandoned females recorded in history, because she
was beautiful in her person, and finally paid the forfeit of her
crimes in a manner perhaps too protracted and informal, and because
the blind chance of birth had placed her in the highest political
office of her native country.

The following extract from a manuscript of undoubted authority, is
given to prove how easily men of the greatest genius may deceive
themselves in antiquarian researches, more especially when plausible
theories are adopted, and then maintained, on the fallacious evidences
of doubtful expressions used by obscure writers, immured perhaps
within the walls of cloisters, or removed to considerable distances,
both of time and space, from the scene of occurrences pretended to be
described, and at periods of our civilization, when no intelligence
was circulated, and when the transit of a few miles equalled the
fatigue, or exceeded the danger, of modern journeys into distant
climates.

Mr. Whitaker has printed two volumes in quarto on the Ancient
Cathedral of Cornwall. One great object of this work, replete like all
the others with the most extensive miscellaneous learning, is to prove
that no Bishop’s see ever existed at Bodmin, and the assertion is
maintained with much vehemence of expression, and disregard of
individuals the most respected. Even Doctor William Borlase, whose
name is consecrated among his countrymen as their boast and their
pride, does not escape from invective and contemptuous epithets, for
having maintained the affirmative in regard to the existence of this
see.

The Reverend Josiah Forshall, late Fellow of Exeter College, and now
Keeper of the Manuscripts in the British Museum, has had the goodness
to favour me with the following communication.

       *     *     *     *     *

     [The Volume from which the following entries are taken, is a copy
     of the Four Gospels in the Vulgate Version, formerly belonging to
     the Church of St. Petroc, and probably at an early period one of
     its chief treasures. It appears to be of the Ninth Century, and
     would perhaps by some critics be assigned to a still more remote
     date. The ornaments of the Ammonian Harmony prefixed, of the
     initial capitals, and of a page which is found immediately before
     the Gospel of St. John, are rude and curious, and strongly
     resemble those which are to be met with in very ancient Mss.
     executed in Ireland. The volume is in quarto, of rather an oblong
     form, and is very neatly written, though evidently by a scribe
     not well informed or of great learning even for those times. It
     was purchased by a London Bookseller at the sale of a private
     library in Oxfordshire, about three years ago, and soon
     afterwards sold to the British Museum, where it is now deposited
     and designated by the No. 9381. The entries seem to be
     contemporaneous with the manumissions which they record.]


1. Hæc sunt nomina illorum hominum, Húna et soror illius Dolo, quos
liberavit Byrhtflœd pro redemptione animæ suæ super altare sancti
Petroci coram istis testibus, Leofric prespiter, Budda prespiter,
Morhaytho prespiter, Deni prespiter, Hresmen diaconus, Custentin
laicus, Wurlowen laycus, ut libertatem habeant cum semine suo sine
fine, et maledictus sit qui fregerit hanc libertatem.

2. Rumun liberavit Halmn super altar sancti Petroci coram his
testibus, clerici sancti Petroci.

3. Budic, Glowmœeth, duos [quos?] liberavit Uulfsie episcopus super
altare sancti Petroci.

4. Hec est nomen qui liberavit Duihon super altare [sancti Petroci]
sancti Leofstan coram istis testibus, Byrhsie presbiter, Morhaetho
diaconus, Britail, Iohann.

5. Hæc sunt nomina illarum feminarum quas liberavit Rum, Addalburg et
Ogurcen coram istis testibus uidentibus Osian presbiter, Cartgethen
diaconus, Leucum clerus.

6. [Wulsige, Cemoyre.]

Wulsige episcopus liberavit Inaprost cum filiis ejus pro anima Eadgar
rex et pro anima sua coram istis testibus, Burhsige presbiter, Electus
presbiter, Abel presbiter, Morhaetho diaconus, Canseetheo diaconus,
Siol diaconus.

7. Hec sunt nomina illorum hominum quos liberabit Ælfsie super altare
sancti Petroci pro redemtione anime sue, Onwen, Ewsannec, Iesu, coram
istis testibus, Byrrhtsie presbiter, Mermen presbiter, Agustinus
lector, Morhaitho diaconus, Siol diaconus.

8. Hoc est nomen illius femine Gluincen, quam liberavit Ordulf pro
anima Ælfsie super altare sancti Petroci coram istis testibus,
Morhaetho diacono, Tithert clerico.

9. Her ys yt es manes nama ethe Byrhsie gefreade et Petrocys stowe
Byhstan hate Bluntan sunu on Æthelhide gewitnyse hys agen wif, et on
Byrhisiys mæse preostes, et on Siol, et Myrmen, et Wunsie, Morhæththo,
et Cunsie preost.

10. He sunt nomina mulierum, Medhuil, Adlgun, quas liberauit Eadmunt
rex super altare sancti Petroci palam istis testibus, Cangueden
diaconus, Rit clericus, Anaoc, Tithert.

11. Hec sunt nomina hominum, quos liberauit Eadmund rex pro anima sua
super altare sancti Petroci, Tancwoystel, Weneriet, coram istis
testibus, Wulfsie presbiter, Adoyse, Milian clericus; atque in eadem
die mandauit hanc feminam, Arganteilin, eisdem testibus.

12. Hæc sunt nomina hominum quos liberauerunt clerici Petroci,
Sulleisoc, Ousduythal, pro anima Eadgari regis super altare sancti
Petroci in festiuitate sancti Micaelis coram istis testibus, Byrhsie
presbiter, Osian presbiter, Austinus lector, Siol diaconus.

13. Hoc est nomen mulieris, Meore, quam liberauit Ullfrit pro anima
sua super altare sancti Petroci coram istis testibus, Mermen
presbiter, Morhaietho diaconus, Guaiethrit clericus.

14. Hec sunt nomina mulierum quas liberauit Wulfsie episcopus et
clerici sancti Petroci, Pioscen, Wuencen, Onncum, Illcum, super altare
sancti Petroci coram istis testibus, Byrhfie presbiter, Siol diaconus,
Morhaetho diaconus, Wuaethrit clericus.

15. Hoc est nomen illius mulieris, Wenceneethel, quam liberauit Ordgar
dux pro anima sua super altare Petroci sancti coram istis testibus,
Wulfsige episcopus, Leumarh presbiter, Grifiueth presbiter, Morhaietho
diaconus.

16. Hoc est nomen illius hominis, Iluith, cum semine suo, quem
liberauit Æthelræd rex super altare sancti coram istis testibus,
Æthelwerd dux testis, Osolf prepositus testis, Mermen prespiter, Siol
prespiter ―――― Leocm, Blethros clericus.

17. Hoc est nomen istius hominis, Madsuth, quem liberauit Iosa pro
redemtione animæ suæ, super altare sancti Petroci coram istis testibus
uidentibus, Tittherd presbiter, Athalberth presbiter, Budda presbiter,
Brytthael presbiter, Cenmyn presbiter; hii sunt laici, Tethion filius
Wasso et Ungust Cilifri; et quicumque fregerit hanc libertatem
anathema sit, et quicumque custodierit benedictus sit.

18. Hec sunt nomina illarum feminarum, quas liberauit Ermen pro anima
matris illius, Guenguiu & Elisaued, super altare sancti Petroci coram
istis testibus uidentibus, Osian presbiter, Leucum clericus, Ret
clericus.

19. Hoc est nomen istius hominis Tesithian cum semine suo quem
liberauit Ordulf filius Brun super altare sancti Petroci pro
redemtione anime sue, ut libertatem habeat ab eo et a semine suo
perpetualiter coram istis idoneis testibus, Leofric presbiter, Prudens
presbiter, Adalberd presbiter, Tittherd presbiter, Budda presbiter,
Boia diaconus, Moraytho diaconus; quicumque fregerit hanc libertatem
anathema sit, et quisquis custodierit benedictus sit.

20. Hoc est nomen illius mulieris, Ælfgyth, quam liberauit Æthælflæd
pro anima sua et pro anima domini sui Æthælwerd dux super cimbalum
sancti Petroci in uilla que nominatur Lyscerruyt coram istis testibus
uidentibus, Æthæstan presbiter, Wine presbiter, Dunstan presbiter,
Goda minister, Ælfwerd scir loce, Æthælwine muf, Ealdred fratrem ejus,
Eadsige scriptor; et hii sunt testes ex cleri sancti Petroci, Prudens
presbiter, Boia ―――― Wulfsige diaconus, Bryhsige clericus, ut libertatem
―――― et postea venit Æthælwærd dux ad monasterium sancti Petroci, et
liberauit eam pro anima sua super altare sancti Petroci coram istis
testibus uidentibus, Buruhwold bisceop, Germanus abbas, Tittherd
presbiter, Wulfsige diaconus, Wurgent filius Samuel, Ylcærthon
præpositus, Tethion consul ―――― filius Mor; et ipse adfirmauit, ut
quicumque custodierit hanc libertatem benedictus sit, et quicumque
fregerit, anathema sit a Domino Deo celi et ab angelis eius.

21. Hoc est nomneillius hominis quem liberauit Cenmenoc pro anima sua
super altare sancti Petroci, Benedic, coram istis testibus uidentibus,
Osian presbiter, Morhaitho diaconus.

22. Hoc est nomen illius Anaguistl quem Eadgar rex liberauit pro anima
sua super altare sancti Petroci coram istis testibus uidentibus,
Wulfsige presbiter, et Grifiueth presbiter, Conseetheo diaconus, et
Byrchtsige clericus, Elie laicos.

23. Wuennmon et hire team, Moruith hise swuster et hire team, et
Wurgustel et his team, wuarun gefreod her on tune for Eadryde cynige
et for Æethelgar biscop, an thas hirydes gewitnesse, ethe her on tune
syndun.

24. Hoc est nomen illius hominis, quem liberauit Perem pro anima sua,
Gurient, super altare sancti Petroci coram istis testibus, Adelces
presbiter, Morhaedo diaconus, Guaedret clericus; uale uale in Christo.

25. Wunstan, Bleethros, Hincomhal, Benedic, Wurcant, Otcer, Onnwuen,
Argantmoet, Telent.

26. Marh gefreode Leethelt et ealle hire team for Eadwig cuninge on
his agen reliquias, et he hie het lædan hider to mynstere et her
gefreogian on Petsocys reliquias on thæs hirydes gewitnesse.

27. Her kyeth on thissere bec yt Æilsig bohte anne wifmann Ongynethel
hatte et hire sunn Gyethiccael æt thurcilde mid healfepunde æt thære
cirican dura on Bodmine, et sealde Æilsige portgereua et Maccosse
hundredes manu iiii. pengas to tolle; tha ferde Æilsig to the tha menn
bohte et nam hig et freode uppan Petrocys weofede æfre sacles. On
gewitnesse thíssa godera manna yt wæs Isaac messe preost, et Bleethcuf
messe preost, et Wunning messe preost, et Wulfger messe preost, et
Grufiueth messe preost, et Noe messe preoste, et Wurthicieth messe
preoste, et Æilsig diacon, et Maccos, et Teethion Modredis sunu, et
Kynilm, et Beorlaf, et Dipling, et Gpatcant, et Talan, et gif hwa thas
freot abrece hebbe him wieth Criste gemene. Amen.

28. Hoc est nomen illius mulieris, Codguio, quam liberata fuit pro
anima Maccosi centurionis super altare sancti Petroci in uigilia
aduentus Domini istis testibus uidentibus, Boia decanus, Gedricus
presbiter, Sewinus presbiter, Eli diaconus, Wulgarus diaconus,
Godricus diaconus, Elwine diaconus, Edricus clericus, Elwinus,
Elwerdus, Suteicus, Waso, Wulwerdus, et alii quam plurimi de bonis
hominibus. Si quis tam temerarius sit, qui hanc libertatem fregerit,
anathema sit a Deo et ab angelis eius. Amen, fiat.

29. Hec sunt nomina illorum quas liberauit pro anima Etgar rex super
altare sancti Petroci, Guenercen, Arganbri; & Iunctor dedit unum pro
anima Etgap rex, id est nomen, Brethoc, coram istis testibus,
Grifiueth, Loumarch presbiter, Gaudseit clericus.

30. Her kyeth on thissere bec yt Ælfric Ælfwines sunu wolde theowian
Putraele him to nyd etheowetlinge; tha [cam?] Putrael to Boia, et bed
his fore spece to Ælfrice his bpeethere, tha sette Boia thei spece
thieth Ælfrice yt wes yt Putrael sealde Ælfrice viii. oxa æt there
cirican dura æt Bodmine, et gef Boia sixtig penga for there for spæce,
et dide hine sylfne et his ofspreng æfre freols et saccles fram tham
dæge wieth Ælfrice et wieth Boia et wieth ealle Ælfwines cyld et heora
ofspreng; on wissere gewittnisse, Isaac messe preost, et Wuning
preost, et Sewulf preost, et Godric diacon, et Cufure prauost, et
Wincuf, et Wulfwerd, et Gestin thes bisceopes stiwend, et Artaca, et
Kinilm, et Godric masse preost, et Wulfger, et ma godra manna.

31. Hæc sunt nomina illorum hominum quos liberauit Ælfsie pro anima
Eadgaro regis super altare sancti Petroci, Guentanet, Cenhuiethel,
Dauid, Anau prost, coram istis testibus, Burhtsie, presbiter, Siol
diaconus, Anaoc clericus, Tidherd clericus, Beniamen clericus.

32. Hoc est nomen illius mulieris quam liberauit Gratcant, Ourdylyc et
filio suo Wurci, super altare sancti Petroci coram istis testibus,
Hedyn presbiter, Lowenan diaconus, Leucum clericos, Blethros clericos,
Boia discipulus, Cenmyn clericos, Beniamen clericos.

33. Hoc est nomen illius mulieris. i. Medguistyl cum progenie sua . i
. Bleidiud, Ylcerthon, Byrchtylym, quos liberauerunt cleri sancti
Petroci super altare illius Petroci pro remedio Eadryd rex et pro
animabus illorum, coram istis testibus, Comuyre prespiter, Grifiud
prespiter, Oysian prespiter, Loumarch diaconus, Wudryt clericus,
Loucum clericus, Tithert clericus.

34. Hær cyeth on thyson béc yt Ælwold gefreode Hwatu far hys sawle
apætrocys stow adegye, et æfter degye; an Ælger ys gewitnisse, et
Godric, et Wulloeth, et Gryfyieth, et Bleyethcuf, et Salaman; et hebbe
he Godes curs et sanctus Petrocus et æalle welkynes sanctas the yt
brece dæ ydon ys. AMEN.

35. Custentin liberauit Proscen pro anima sua super altare sancti
Petroci coram istis testibus, Mermen presbiter, Siol diaconus,
Cantgueithen diaconus, Tithert clericus, et aliis multis.

36. Wulfsie episcopus liberavit Ædoc filiam Catgustel pro anima sua et
Edgari regis super altare sancti Petroci.

37. Hæc sunt nomina illorum hominum illarumque quos liberauit Wulfsige
episcopus super altare sancti Petroci pro anima sua et pro anima
Eadgæri regis, Cyngelt, et Magnus, et Sulmeath, et Iustus, et Rumun,
et Wengor, et Luncen, et Fuandrec, et Wendeern, et Wurethylic, et
Cengor, et Inisian, et Brenci, et Onwean, et Sunduran, et Lywci.

38. Hæc sunt nomina illarum feminarum quas liberauit Ermen pro anima
matris illius, id est, Guenguiu & Elisaued, coram istis testibus,
Freoc presbiter, & Osian presbiter, & Leucum monachus.

39. Hoc est nomen illius hominis qui liberauit Osferd pro anima
Eatgari regis, Gurheær super altare sancti Petroci coram istis
testibus, Comoere episcopus, Agustinus lector, Byrhsie sacerdos.

40. Hæc est nomen qui libuerauit Eusebi pro anima sua, Ceenguled super
altare sancti Petroci coram istis testibus, Grifiud, Leumarh, Siol.

41. Hec sunt nomina illorum hominum, quos liberauit Anaoc pro anima
sua, Otcer, Rannoeu, Muel, Patsec, Iosep, super altare sancti Petroci
coram istis testibus uidentibus, Cemoere episcopus, Osian sacerdos,
Leucum clericus, Guaedret clericus.

42. Hæc sunt nomina illorum hominum, Agustin, Ælchon, Sulcen, Loi,
Milcenoc, Guenneret, Gurcencor, Siol, Anaudat, Æulcen, Gurcantcest,
Eniud, Oncenedl, Lucco, Iudhent.

43. Wes sint tha menn tha Wulfsige byscop gefreode for Eadgar cinig et
for hyne silfne æt Petroc ys wefode, Leuhelec, Welet, Unwalt, Beli,
Iosep, Dengel, Proswetel, Tancwuestel; et thas gewitnese, Byrhsige
mæsse post, Mermen masse prost, Mar. Catuutic, Wenwiu, Puer,
Meethwuistel, Iosep; thys syndun thara manna namana ethe Wulfsige
byscop gefreode æt Petroc ys wefode for Eadgar et for hyne silfne, et
Byrhsi ys gewitnese masse prost, et Mermen masse prost, et Morhietho.

44. Diuset et ealle here team, ethys sindun thara manna namana ethe
Wunsie Conmonoc gefreode at Petrocys stowe ――――. Eadgar cinig on ealle
ethæs hiredys gewitnesse, Iarnwallon, et Wenwænthlon, et Mæiloc.

45. Hæc sunt nomina filiorum Wurcon, Aeethan, Iudhend, Wenweoethu,
Gunuaret, quorum filii et nepotes posteritasque omnis defenderunt se
per iuramentum, Eadgari regis permisu, quoniam accussatione malefici
dicebantur patres eorum fuisse coloni regis, Comoere episcopo teste,
Ælfsie præside teste, Doengand teste, March teste, Elfnod teste,
Burhtsie prespiter teste, Macuieth prespiter teste, Abel prespiter
teste.

46. Hoc est nomen illius uiri, quem liberauit Byrhtgyuo, Salenn, pro
anima sua super altare sancti Petroci coram istis testibus Leofsie
presbiter, Osian presbiter, Morcant ――――.

       *     *     *     *     *

Bishop Godwin says, in his Catalogue of the Bishops of England:--

The See of Athelstan, in the Diocese of Cornwall, was for a while at
St. Petrock’s in Bodmin; afterwards at St. German’s.

The successors, he adds, of Athelstan, in the Diocese of Cornwall,
were these,

  Conanus.
  Ruydocus.
  Adredus.
  Britwyn.
  Athelstan secundus, in 966.
  Walfi.
  Woronus.
  Walocus.
  Stidio.
  Adelredus.
  Burwoldus.


_Bishops of Devonshire._

  Werstanus, or Adulphus, consecrated 905, died 906: his see was at
    Bishop’s Tawter.
  Putta, murdered by Uffa, the King’s Lieutenant.
    Eadulphus, brother to Alsius, Duke of Devonshire and Cornwall, was
    installed Bishop of Devonshire, at Crediton, A. D. 910.
  Ethelgar was Bishop from 932 to 942.
  Algarus, died in 952.
  Alfwaldus, (recommended by St. Dunstan) died 972.
  Alwolfus, sate nine years.
  Sydemon.
  Alfredus or Alfricus, Abbat of Malmesbury, died 999.
  Alwalfus.
  Eadnothus.
  Livingus, Abbat of Tavistock, was consecrated Bishop of Crediton,
    1032. He was the nephew of Burwoldus, the last Bishop of Cornwall,
    upon whose decease the Bishopric of Cornwall was added to the see
    of Crediton.
  Leofric, the last Bishop of Crediton, obtained from St. Edward, to
    transfer the see of the united Diocese to Exeter.

There is extant a very curious reason assigned by King Edward the
elder, for an endowment of these manors on Eadulphus, made Bishop of
Crediton in 910, not very flattering to the see of Cornwall.

  Ut inde, singulis annis, visitaret gentem
  Cornubiensem, ad exprimendos eorum errores,
  Nam antea in quantum potuerunt veritati
  Resistebant, et non decretis apostolicis obediebant.

  Ruan Lanihorne measures 1925 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as    £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815      2,365    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                      245     6    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    329   |    328   |     376    |    424
    giving an increase of 29 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of this parish belong to the calcareous series, and are the
same with those of Filley.




RUAN MAJOR.


HALS.

Ruan Major is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and hath upon the
north and west Mullyan and Cury, east St. Kevorne, south Ruan Minor.

Partly in this parish stands the barton of Erisey or Herisey; from
this place was denominated an old family of gentlemen surnamed de
Erisey, now in possession thereof, who have flourished there in
worshipful degree for many generations; and particularly George
Erisey, esq. was sheriff of Cornwall, 4 Henry VIII. 1514; also the
present possessor, Richard Erisey, esq. son of James Erisey of
Brickleigh in Devon, by ―――― Dowrige, was sheriff of Cornwall the 7th
of William III.: he married ―――― sister and coheir of George Killigrew
of Arwinick, esq. (son and daughter of Sir Peter Killigrew, Baronet)
by whom he had issue one only daughter named ――――; which lady and her
said daughter, after some years’ cohabitation with Mr. Erisey, upon
some discontent eloped from him, and by no entreaties could be
persuaded to a reconcilement or return to her said husband, or to
restore his daughter on her begotten, to his possession, which she
kept with her; whereupon, in the year 1701, Mr. Erisey brought down a
trial at law against Mr. Lister, cognominatus Killigrew, his
brother-in-law, before Mr. Justice Blencowe at Lanceston, who then
also lodged and detained his said daughter from him; upon which trial
at the crown bar, Mr. Killigrew aforesaid and his niece appeared, when
it was manifested to the court that he laid no restriction upon the
young lady; but, if she would, she might at any time go to her
father’s house; yet her eloped mother so influenced her, that the
judge nor court could not prevail with her to do it, though her father
Mr. Erisey was then and there also in court ready to receive her with
tears, she being the heir-at-law both to his and much of her
grandfather Sir Peter Killygrew’s lands; so that from Lanceston she
went again to her mother, with the said Mr. Lister Killygrew, and was
afterwards married to one captain or colonel West, a soldier of
fortune, by whom I hear she had two daughters now living; after which
she died, her father and mother living in a separate state as
aforesaid: of which gentleman, Mr. Erisey’s vexation and trouble for
the loss of his wife’s company, I am informed its parallel to that of
Hector’s, whom Homer makes thus to speak.

  I do not doubt but stately Troye
    Will have a grievous fall;
  And warlike Priam’s people eke,
    And Priam shall be thrall;
  But care of people nor of sire,
    Nor eke of Priam’s Kinge,
  Nor brother’s, though many of them,
    And worthy in each thinge,
  Shall dye in hands of foes, soe much
    Doe pinch my pensive heart;
  As care of thee, my dearest wife,
    Doth vex, and cause me smart.

From whence it appears that Homer and Hector thought a good and
righteous marriage the only happy state of human life; for a good,
faithful, and loving wife brings up the husband’s children in order,
governs his family, saves his substance, rules his house as well as
increases his offspring, with the greatest faithfulness and integrity.

And if any charge or labour happen, for no state of human life is
without a cross, verily this only is that light burden and sweet yoke
which is found only in honest wedlock: especially if the wife be such
as Hector’s was, in whom no avarice, nor pride, nor deceit, nor
covetousness, nor fraud, was found that joined them together.

One of those Eriseys dancing with other gentlemen and ladies at
Whitehall, before King James I. through the violent motion and action
of his body in the middle of the dance, had his cap slip from his
head, and fall to the ground, but he instantly with his foot tossed it
on his head again, and proceeded without let or hindrance with his
part in that dance, to the admiration of all that saw it, which gave
occasion to King James to inquire who that active gentleman was; and
being told that his name was Erisey, he forthwith replied, I like the
gentleman very well, but not his name of Heresy. The arms of Erisey
are in a field Sable, a chevron between three griffins segreant Or;
which arms of ancient erection by James Erisey, Sheriff of Cornwall, 4
Henry VIII. were lately extant in the glass windows of this church.

At the time of the Norman Conquest, this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Lizard or Lizart. In the inquisition into the value of
Cornish benefices by the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1294, this
church was not extant or endowed; though before Wolsey’s Inquisition
1521, it had revenues by the masters or governor of St John’s Hospital
at Sithney, or the Carmenows of Carmenow, who were patrons thereof,
and valued at £10. 10_s._ 0½_d._ The patronage now in Robinson, who
purchased it from Carmenows’ heirs; and the parish rated to the four
shillings per pound Land Tax, 1696, £23. 8_s._


TONKIN.

Ruan Major is in that part of the hundred of Kerrier, called Meneage,
hath to the west Mullian, to the north Cury and Mawgan, to the east
St. Keverne, to the south Ruan Minor. This parish takes its name from
and is dedicated to St. Ruan, as the former. It is a rectory, valued
in the King’s Book, £16. 10_s._ 0_d._ ob. The patronage in the heirs
of George Robinson, esq.; the incumbent Mr. William Robinson, his
cousin-german, and right heir in blood.


THE EDITOR.

There does not appear to be any thing demanding particular notice in
this parish. The family of Erisey were seated here from remote
antiquity, on a manor and barton of the same name. Mr. Lysons states
that the mansion house was rebuilt about the year 1620; and that the
family became extinct in 1722, when their estates passed with an
heiress to Col. John West, and since by purchase to the Boscawens of
Tregothnan.

The advowson of the living belonged to the late Rev. William Robinson
of Nanceloe.

If the translation from Homer is by Mr. Hals himself, the lines prove
him to be a very moderate poet; if they were from a work then before
the public, we may congratulate ourselves that Pope has introduced the
greatest of Bards into English society, arrayed in a more appropriate
garb. Ιλιαδος, z. 440.

  Τηνδ’ αυτε προσεειπε μεγας κορυθαιολος Ἑκτωρ.

Iliad, Book the 6th, l. 570.

  Yet come it will, the day decreed by Fates,――
  How my heart trembles, while my tongue relates!――
  The day when thou, imperial Troy! must bend,
  And see thy warriors fall, thy glories end.
  And yet no dire presage so wounds my mind,
  My mother’s death, the ruin of my kind,
  Not Priam’s hoary hairs defil’d with gore,
  Not all my brothers gasping on the shore;
  As thine, Andromache!

  This parish measures 2,325 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815            845    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           140   12    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    142   |    167   |     187    |    162
    giving an increase of 14 per cent. in 30 years, but with a
      diminution in the last ten years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. H. T. Coulson, presented by P. V. Robinson,
    esq. in 1828.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish is entirely situated on the serpentine of the Lizard
district, but as it no where extends to the sea coast it is not
favourable to geological pursuits.




RUAN MINOR.


HALS.

Ruan Minor is also situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and hath upon
the north Ruan Major, east St. Kevorne, west Grade, south the British
Ocean or Channel. In the Domesday Book it was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Lizard; and at the time of the first inquisition into
the value of Cornish Benefices 1294, it was not endowed if extant. In
Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, it was valued at £4. 4_s._ 5_d._; the
patronage formerly in the master of St. John’s Hospital at Sythney, or
Carmenow of Carmenow, who endowed it, now Robinson; the incumbent
――――; and the parish rated to the four shillings per pound Land Tax
1696, temp. William III. at £17. 11_s._ 2_d._

In this parish at Cadgwith, i. e. war-tree, so called in memory of
some war or battle heretofore fought near some tree then extant in
this place, is the dwelling of George Robinson, esq. that married
three wives, Trevillian’s widow, Tregose, and Penhallow; his father
Thomas Robinson, esq. a Commissioner for the Peace in the interregnum
of Cromwell, that lived at Helston, was there, as he was walking in
the fields where his cows depastured, casually assaulted with his
bull, who, though at other times was a creature very gentle and quiet
by nature, at that time put on an unusual ferocity, without any
provocation or distaste given him from his master, that he instantly
left his fellow creatures, and ran towards Mr. Robinson, and gave him
many dangerous wounds in his body by pushing at him with his horns,
and at length cast him up into the air, from thence whereby he fell to
the ground several times to his greater hurt, till at length by those
violent tossings of his body, his hat flew from his head on the
ground, and was driven thence by the force of the wind to the surface
of the earth, to some distance, which the enraged bull observing,
pursued after it, and tossed the same into the air with his horns
several times after, which gave Mr. Robinson, then comparatively dead
on the ground, opportunity to get to the stile of the field, and to
crawl over it into another close, by which means, and the help of
others, he got alive to his house, in order to cure his wounds, but
maugre all endeavours of physicians and chirurgeons, his wounds and
bruises were so deep and mortal, that in three or four days after he
died.

Various were the sentiments of the neighbours upon this sad accident.
But I shall shut up this history in the words of our Saviour, on other
such sad accidents amongst the Jews: saying, “Think ye that those
sixteen on whom the tower of Siloham fell, or those whose blood Pilate
mixed with their sacrifices, were sinners above all men? I tell you
nay, but except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish, for secret
things belong only to God.”

The arms of Robinson are, in a field Vert three bucks in full course,
armed and attired Or.

Note further, that all those twelve parishes commonly called Meneage,
the outmost south-west part or point of Cornwall, in the Domesday Book
of William the Conqueror, are all comprehended or taxed under the name
of Liz-ard, which signifies in British the lofty or dangerous gulf or
flux of waters, as the same is, and over a strag or promontory of
ragged rocks running for about half a mile out into the sea from the
land, visible at low water, but not at full sea or half flood, which
hath occasioned the destruction or wrecking of many ships, and loss of
many men’s lives and goods, who either in the night storms, or through
ignorance, have chanced to sail over it, and are wrecked between the
strait of those rocks, and the furious meeting or flashing of the
waves of the sea.

Hence also from the word liz, which signifies a hazardous gulph of
water between two lands, rivers, or arms of the sea, we have
Tre-liz-ike, St. Earth, and Padstow harbour, Lelizike, mills in
Probus, on the Tresilian river. Liz or Lisburne, a town in Portugal,
and many more.


TONKIN.

Ruan Minor joins with Ruan Major, which lies to the north of it, to
the west and south with Grade, to the east with the Channel. This
parish has the same patron and incumbent as the former, and is valued
in the King’s Book, £4. 4_s._ 5_d._ [It was originally, no doubt, a
mere chapel to Ruan Major.]


THE EDITOR.

The only place in this small parish requiring the least notice is
Cadgwith or Cagewith, a moderately sized fishing cove, and heretofore
celebrated for its lucrative trade, while the rights of the duchy were
practically maintained against the admission of all coercive laws,
relative either to the Customs or to the Excise.

The principal part of this parish anciently belonged to the
distinguished family of Carminow.

Mr. Lysons says, that on the partition of their property between
heiresses, the lands in Ruan Minor were allotted to Trevarthian, whose
heiress brought them to the Reskymers, who had them in 1620; they were
afterwards in the Bellots, of whom the property was purchased by
Robinson of Nanceloe, and alienated from them to an adventurer called
Fonnereau, who having obtained a seat in Parliament, procured a
lucrative bargain for constructing lighthouses on the Lizard Point.
Having ultimately become a bankrupt, or died insolvent, every thing
that he had purchased was again sold, and the lands in this parish
were bought by the late Sir Christopher Hawkins, about the year 1780,
and they now belong, under a special devise, to his brother’s second
son.

The advowson of the rectory was reserved in the sale by Robinson.

Mr. Lysons records one of those singular customs in ecclesiastical
matters which arose in former times out of the capricious fancies of
individuals making gifts for the salvation of their souls. It seems
that the rector of this parish sends a horse into a certain field in
the adjoining parish of Landewednack, whenever a harvest of corn is
taken in it, for the purpose of bearing home as many sheaves as the
horse can carry on his back.

  Ruan Minor measures 628 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           538    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           93    7    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    317   |    274   |     293    |    269
    giving a decrease of 15 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. R. T. St. Aubyn, presented by P. V.
    Robinson, esq. in 1814.


THE GEOLOGY BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish is composed of serpentine, and of a peculiar kind of
hornblende rock, already noticed under the head of Mullion. The cliffs
between Cadgwith and Poltesca afford many illustrations of the manner
in which these rocks are associated together.

       *     *     *     *     *

A very excellent “Sketch of the Geology of the Lizard District,”
accompanied by a map, may be found in the first volume of the
Transactions of the Royal Geological Society of Cornwall, by Ashhurst
Majendie, esq. F.R.S. &c. now of Hedingham Castle in Essex.――Ed.




ST. SAMPSON’S.


For the history of this parish the reader is referred to the second
volume, where it has already appeared under the name of Glant.




SANCREED.


HALS.

Sancreed is situate in the hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the north
Morva, west St. Just, south Buryan, east Madderne.

At the time of the Norman Conquest this district passed under the
jurisdiction of Alverton. In the inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln
and Winchester, aforementioned 1294, Ecclesia de Sancti Credi, in
decanatu de Penwith, was rated at £6. In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, at
£8. The parish was rated to the four shillings per pound Land Tax,
1696, at £91. 9_s._ 0_d._

The earth of this parish hath tin lodes in it of great riches.


TONKIN.

Sancreed is in the hundred of Penwith, and hath to the west Just, to
the north Morva, to the east Maddern and St. Paulin, to the south St.
Buryan.

This parish takes its name from and is dedicated to St. Sancred.
[Query, if not Creed, and so called Saint-Creed or Sancred? Certainly
not, as it is denominated expressly, “Ecclesia Sancti Sancredi,” in
the Valor of 1291. W.]

It is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book, £8. 0_s._ 0_d._; the
patronage in the Dean and Chapter of Exeter; the incumbent ――――.

In anno 1291, 20 Edward I. this church was valued (Tax. Benef.) at £6,
being then appropriated to the Dean and Chapter of Exeter.


THE EDITOR.

This parish is the only one west of Hayle that does not reach the sea
shore.

There is little remarkable about the church and tower, although they
are pleasing objects in various directions. The church contains
monuments to some former vicars, and also to Mrs. Bird. This lady was
the only daughter of Mr. William Wayne, a gentleman brought from
Bristol to instruct the newly established copper smelting company at
Hayle, in the requisite branches of metallurgy. He married in
Cornwall, and his daughter succeeded to a portion of the very
considerable property left by Mr. Abell Angove of Trevenson.

Miss Wayne was born at St. Erth in 1762, married Mr. Bird a gentleman
of Devonshire in 1785; and having become a widow, died near Plymouth
in 1803, without leaving any family. Several of her maternal relations
had been buried here.

The great tithes belong to the Chapter of Exeter, who are patrons of
the vicarage, which is endowed with the lordship of a manor.

This parish has to boast of a consecrated well, efficacious for
restoring health to children, and indebted for its virtues probably to
St. Enny, as the remains of a chapel dedicated to that saint are near
the well,

Mr. Hals has a long dissertation on the various creeds professed at
different times in the Christian church, and fancies that this house
may indicate an assumption by the inhabitants of the one most holy of
all. This is omitted. It seems, however, to be worth remarking, that
all the people of the county used to pronounce the word san-crist; and
this, joined with the fast of the parish feast being celebrated, not
in honor of any particular saint, but at Whitsuntide, may be
sufficient for suggesting a query at least, whether the church is not
really dedicated to the Saviour of Mankind.

Drift in this parish, was formerly the residence of the Trew-rens, or
more probably Tre-wren, which is said to mean the fair and handsome
town. The family removed to Trewardreva in Constantine, and Drift was
sold about sixty years ago, by the last Mr. Trewren.

Tregonnebris, stated by Mr. Lysons to be the only manor in the parish,
belongs to Mr. Buller of Downs, derived from Ezekiel Grosse. The
barton was held for many years under lease for lives by a branch of
the Lanyons, and so entirely bare of trees is this district, that
every child in the west of Cornwall is acquainted with the tale of a
Mr. Longer of Tregonnebris, being terrified by a supposed attack of
robbers when he first heard the hooting of an owl.

The late vicar Mr. Sechell held also the vicarage of St. Just.

  Sancreed measures 3997 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3593   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           321  11    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    782   |    790   |    1001    |   1069
    giving an increase of 36½ per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. William Stabback, presented by the Dean and
    Chapter of Exeter in 1816.


THE GEOLOGY BY DOCTOR BOASE.

Like St. Levar and Morval, this parish is entirely situated on the
granite of the Land’s End district.




SENNEN.


HALS.

St. Sennen is situate in the hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the
north St. Just, south St. Levan, east Buryan, west the Land’s End and
the Atlantic Ocean. As for the name, if it be compounded of Sen-nan,
it signifies the holy valley; but most likely the name is derived from
the tutelar guardian and patron of this church.

At the time of the Norman Conquest this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Buryan, on which it is still dependant in spirituals
as a daughter church. And if this church were extant, and endowed at
the time of the first inquisition into the value of Cornish Benefices
1294, it then was rated also under Buryan. Lastly, this parish was
rated to the four shillings per pound Land Tax 1696, at £57. 12_s._
0_d._ by the name of Sennan.

Upon view of this church 1700, the sexton shewed me the headless
bodies of some images of human shape cut in alabaster, that were not
long before found hid in the walls of the same, all curiously wrought,
which also had been painted with gold, vermillion, and blue bice, on
several parts of their garments. He also shewed me an inscription on
the foot of the font stone, which he told me several Bishops of Exeter
and their priests, in their triennial visitations at Buryan and this
church, had viewed and inspected, but could not read it; whereupon, in
like manner, I observed on the font-stone the said inscription in a
barbarous strange character or letters, of which I could see but part,
by reason a new pew or seat was built on a part of it; however, I
interpreted that which I saw to consist of these letters, Anno Dom.
mille CCCCXX or XL, in the year of our Lord 1420 or 1440. Let the
curious remove the seat and explain the rest; probably this church was
then erected.

At Pen-ros in this parish, i. e. the head of the valley, near some
high promontory of lands, is the dwelling of Henry Jones, esq. some
time Commissioner for the Peace and Taxes, who married Tonkyn of
Newlyn.

Trevear in this parish, i. e. the great or greater town, is the
dwelling of John Ellis, gent. Attorney at Law, who married ――――
Davies, and giveth for his arms in a field Argent, three eels Proper,
after the English, out of a supposed allusion to the name Ellis;
whereas, ellis, elles, in British, is a son-in-law by the wife; and
els, ells, a son-in-law by the husband. And as gealvy is an eel fish
in Scotch and Irish, so malsay is an eel in Welsh British. See Floyd,
page 218; and sleane is a conger fish in Cornish; and lilly, silli, is
an ele or eele, in that language. See Floyd on Anguilla.

This parish affords very little wheat corn, by reason it is a naked
country exposed to the wind and sharp air of the sea in winter season,
which washes or frets the same out of the ground at that time, unless
it stands in the valleys or close places between the hills against the
south or east; nevertheless it is abundantly supplied with barley
corn, the soil producing, generally, with little husbandry or
cultivation, twenty Cornish bushels in most acres; that is to say,
about sixty Winchesters.

In this parish is situate the most remote north-west promontory or
head-land of the Island of Great Britain, where it is not above an
arrow’s flight breadth (at the end thereof), the lands naturally or
gradually declining from St. Just, and Chapel Carne Braye, four miles
distant, to this place, and the sea at least eighty fathom under those
places; where, as it were in a low valley, it meets the waves of the
Atlantic Sea, or West Ocean, and parts some of the Irish Sea and
British Channel asunder by its horned promontory of land; which shows
that opinion and tradition of the lands extending further west of old
towards Scilly, to be a vulgar error and a fable; for if it had
stretched more westerly than it doth in this lower valley, and no
higher pitch or degree, the flux and reflux of the sea or tides would
inevitably overflow it. Or had there been any considerable parcel of
ground there broke off from the insular continent of Britain, (as
tradition saith the country of Lioness was,) by some inundation,
earthquake, or accidental concussion, it must have been much higher
land than the contiguous country of the Land’s End is. Otherwise it
could not exist there as aforesaid; but it is not likely there was
ever any such land, since no fracture or disjointing of the earth
appears on the confines or summit thereof.

Though at low water there is to be seen far off towards Scilly,
(probably so called from the abundance of eel or conger fishes taken
there, called sillys or lillis,) for a mile or more a dangerous strag
of ragged rocks, amongst which the Atlantic Sea, and the waves of St.
George’s and the British Channel meeting, make a dreadful bellowing
and rumbling noise at half ebb and half flood: which let seamen take
notice of, to avoid them.

Of old there was one of those rocks more notable than the rest, which,
tradition saith, was ninety feet above the flux and reflux of the sea,
with an iron spire at the top thereof, which was overturned or thrown
down by a violent storm 1647, and the rock broken in three pieces.
This iron spire, as the additions to Camden’s Britannia inform us, was
thought to have been erected there by the Romans, or set up as a
trophy there by King Athelstan when he first conquered the Scilly
Islands (and was in those parts); but it is not very probable such a
piece of iron in this salt sea and air, without being consumed by
rust, could endure so long a time. However it is or was, certain I am
it commonly was called in Cornish, An Marogeth Arvowed, i. e. the
armed knight; for what reason I know not, except erected by or in
memory of some armed knight; as also carne-an peul, id est, the spile,
spire, pole, or javelin rock. Again, remember silly, lilly, is in
Cornish and Armoric language a conger fish or fishes, from whence
Silly Islands is probably denominated, as elsewhere noted.

This place is called by the Welsh Bards Pen-ryn-Pen-wid, that is to
say, Penwith Hill Head Tree, or the hill of the Head Tree, or Penwith
Cantred. By the Cornish Britains, Pedn-an-lase, i. e. the Green Head
or Promontory, and by others, Antyer Deweth, the Land’s End.


TONKIN.

This parish takes its name from its tutelar saint St. Sennan, or
Sinninus, an Irish Abbat, who (saith Leland) was at Rome with St.
Patrick, and came over from Ireland to Cornwall with St. Breage. The
church hath dedicated the 30th of June to his memory. It is a daughter
church to St. Burien, and is valued, together with that and St. Levan,
in the King’s Book, at £48. 12_s._

[The passage alluded to above as in Leland, is this, and in Itin. III.
15, “Breaca,” he says, out of a Life of St. Breage which he met with
in Cornwall, “venit in Cornubiam, comitata multis Sanctis; inter quos
fuerunt Sinninus Abbas, qui Romæ cum Patritio fuit.”]


THE EDITOR.

This parish is greatly distinguished as being the most western in
England, and containing within it the promontory, which, without
reference to the cardinal points, evidently terminates the granite
chain, which stretching out from Dartmoor, extends by links, apparent
at intervals at the surface, to this point, the most distant on the
continent of England. The same range appears again in the Scilly
Islands, and it may possibly join the similar granitic districts in
France.

It is a very curious circumstance, that, notwithstanding the great
numbers of square leagues composed entirely of granite in Cornwall and
in Devonshire, that magnificent rock never appears in the cliff except
for a few miles on each side of the Land’s End; but there it is seen
piled in high masses one on the other, which, coupled with the great
Atlantic swell of the waves, present a general effect the most
magnificent that can well be imagined. And what adds still more to the
grandeur of the scene, about a mile from the extreme point, a lofty
range of rocks, called the Longships, rises out of the sea. On the
most elevated point of this rock a light-house was constructed about
fifty years ago, nearly after the model of Mr. Smeaton’s building on
the Eddystone; this column has the advantage, however, of standing at
a great height above the water, so as, perhaps, never to receive an
actual blow from the most violent wave; yet so tempestuous is the sea,
that for three months together all communication has been intercepted
between the lampmen and the shore.

The latitude and longitude of the Land’s End appear, from the
Trigonometrical Survey, to be, latitude 50° 4′ 7″; longitude 5° 41′
32″; in time 22m. 46s. west from Greenwich.

The church of this parish is a very conspicuous object in every
direction. It is on the usual plan of churches in this district, and
is built of granite with a granite tower. In it are some monuments,
particularly to the Ellises, who have relinquished the three eels
mentioned by Mr. Hals as an armorial bearing, and instead have
sculptured on these stones the blazon appropriated to the name
throughout England, Argent, on a cross Sable five crescents of the
Field.

The church town has a pretty good inn, capable of affording
entertainment, and even beds to parties――

  Led by the fable of Belerus old,
  Or the Great Vision of the Guarded Mount.

This inn is distinguished by a sign bearing two inscriptions suited to
its peculiar situation. Travellers proceeding to the Land’s End, find
the board inscribed with these words,

  The last public house in England;

returning, they see on the other side,

  The first public house in England.

About half a mile further eastward than the church town, is a village
called Mean, probably from the great number of large rocks
interspersed among the houses. In the very midst of the village is a
large flat rock, on which three kings are reported to have dined
together at some remote period; and a prophecy of Merlin is added to
the tale, that a larger number of kings will be assembled round this
rock for the same purpose previously to some great catastrophe, or to
the destruction of the world itself.

Not far from Mean is Whitsand Bay, from whence Athelstan is said to
have embarked for the Scilly Islands, and to have landed on his
return. King Stephen is also said to have landed here; and King John
on his return from Ireland; and lastly, Perkin Warbeck; but various
other bays have derived a similar name from their white sands, and
therefore the honours bestowed on this remote and dangerous cove may
be very doubtful.

Mr. Hals has adverted to the fertility of this parish, and noticed the
production of twenty Cornish bushels, equaling sixty Winchester
bushels, of barley on one acre. The parish certainly is very fertile,
being situated on granite peculiarly abounding in felspar; but the
Cornish acre, derived from the Saxon pole of eighteen feet, exceeds
the Norman acre in the proportion of six to five, therefore the
produce is reduced to fifty bushels.

It is much to be lamented that a variety of measures should remain in
different parts of the United Kingdom.

In Ireland the pole is 21 feet. Their mile consists, like our own, of
320 poles, but of course exceeds our measure in the proportion of 21
to 16½, or as 14 to 11.

The Irish acre, like our own, contains 160 square poles, but exceeds
it in the proportion of 21 squared to 16½ squared, or as 14 squared to
11 squared, as 196 to 121, as 13 to 8 very nearly.

The patron saint selected for this parish by Mr. Hals, is stated to be
a Persian of that name, who was seized at Babylon, and delivered to
the fury of wild beasts at Rome, which, as in the case of Daniel,
became mild and abstained from hurting him; but here the parallel
ends, for Valerianus, instead of acknowledging the God of one so
miraculously preserved, ordered gladiators immediately to kill the
saint, and they obeyed. Reference is made to the Agonal of Baronius;
but this saint is little known in England or by English writers.

A much more likely patron may therefore be discovered with Mr. Tonkin,
in another St. Senan, of whom Dr. Butler gives the following account:

     “St. Senan, Bishop and Confessor, was born in the county of
     Hy-Conalls in Ireland, about the latter part of the fifth
     century, and was a disciple of the Abbots Cassiolus and
     Natal or Naal. He then travelled for spiritual improvement
     to Rome, and thence into Britain. In this kingdom he
     contracted a close friendship with St. David. After his
     return to Ireland he founded many churches; and a great
     monastery in Inis Cathaig, an island lying at the mouth of
     the river Shannon, which he governed, and in which he
     continued to reside after he was advanced to the episcopal
     dignity. The abbots his successors, for several centuries,
     were all bishops till this great diocese was divided into
     three, namely, Limerick, Killaloe, and Ardfert.

     “St. Senan died on the same day and year with St. David; but
     he was honoured in the Irish church on the 8th of March. A
     town in Cornwall bears the name of St. Senan. See his Acts
     in Colgan, p. 602.”

The Persian saint is said to be honoured on the 30th of July in the
Greek church, so that the parish feast, which is kept on the nearest
Sunday to St. Andrew’s day, has not any reference to either of the
supposed patrons.

  Sennen measures 2223 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2148    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           161    2    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    431   |    495   |     637    |    689
    giving an increase of 60 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish, like the last, rests only on granite; at low water,
however, some felspathic rocks may be seen.

The granite exhibits the common varieties of this part of Cornwall,
and is traversed by porphyritic beds; one of which at Mean is a
compound of granular felspar and shorl in various proportions. This
kind is of rare occurrence; it is traversed by veins of quartz, which
are occasionally much intermixed with shorl; this mineral also abounds
in the adjoining granite, but more particularly in the veins by which
it is traversed.

Whitsand Bay is covered with a testaceous sand like that of St. Ives,
of Padstow, and of other places on the north coast; a large tract of
this sand is exposed at low water to the action of the wind, by which
it has been drifted in considerable quantities inland so far as Sennen
Green.




SHEVIOCK.


HALS.

Sheviock is situate in the hundred of East, and hath upon the north
St. German’s Creek, east Anthony, west St. German’s, south the British
channel.

At the time of the Norman Conquest this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of the Abbey town, now St. German’s. In the inquisition
of the Bishop of Lincoln aforesaid 1294, Ecclesia de Sevyock, in
decanatu de Est, was rated cvi_s._ viij_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition
1521, at £26. 14_s._ 6_d._; and the parish rated to the four shillings
per pound Land Tax, for one year 1696, at £166.

This church was founded and endowed by those knightly gentlemen, lords
of the barton and manor aforesaid, surnamed Daunye or Dawney. Mr.
Carew tells us in his Survey of Cornwall, that the funeral monuments
of two of those knights are yet extant in this church, though the
inscriptions about them are worn out by time. Certes, this was a very
famous and flourishing family on the barton of Shevyock aforesaid, for
several descents, till the time of King Richard II. when the sole
daughter and heir of Sir John de Dawney, knight, named Emelyn, was
married to Edward Courtenay, 11th Earl of Devon, 1380, by whom he had
issue Edward Courtenay, surnamed the blind, the 12th Earl of Devon,
and Sir Hugh Courtenay of Haccomb, knight; the which Edward, at the
request of his said mother, by his deed bearing date the 2d of King
Henry Fifth, settled upon the said Sir Hugh Courtenay his brother, the
manors of Gotherington, South Allington, and Stancomb Dawney in Devon,
which were the lands of her ancestors the Dawneys. Afterwards, the
said Edward died, 7th Henry V. 1418. (See Brooke in his Catalogue of
Devon Earls.)

By this Emelyn Dawney, as traditions amongst the family of the
Courtenays have it, Boconock came first into their tribe, though
others say that it came to Sir Hugh Courtenay of Haccomb, by
Lerchdeacon’s heir, but more truly that his said mother settled it
upon him on his marriage with Lerchdeacon of Haccomb’s heir.

One Nicholas de Dawney, 3 Henry IV. held in the hundred of East, by
the tenure of knight service, two knight’s fees and a half. (Survey of
Cornwall, page 41.) Of the arms of those gentlemen thus speaks
Nicholas Upton in his Latin manuscript, before printing was invented
1440. Monsieur Gwilliam Dawney port d’Argent, oue trois popinjays en
bend oue deux cottises. Again, Monsieur John Dawney port d’Argent, en
une bende Vert trois rose de Or, oue deux costs de Azure; from whence
I infer there were either several families of those Dawneys, that gave
different arms, or that in those days they had no positive record of
their bearings.

One Sir John Dawney, knt. of Cowick, in Yorkshire, Sheriff of that
county 35 Henry VIII. gave for his arms, in a field Argent, on a bend
cottised Sable, three annulets of the Field, which is the recorded
arms of Dawney.


TONKIN.

This church is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book at £26. 14_s._
6_d._ The patronage in Sir William Carew, Bart.; the incumbent Mr.
Archdeacon Kendall.

In anno 1291, 20 Edw. I. this church was valued (Tax. Benef.) at
106_s._ 8_d._ having never been appropriated.


THE MANOR OF SHEVIOCK.

“The next parish upon this river (Lyner),” saith Mr. Carew, (lib. 2,
fol. 108), “is called Sheviock, sometimes the ancient Dauny’s
inheritance and inhabitance, by whose daughter and heir the same,
together with other fair possesions, descended to the Earls of Devon.”

In the extent of Cornish acres, 12 Edw. I. (Carew, fol. 486) Sheviock
is valued in £100, to which no other manor in the county comes up, but
that of Lanrake and Pawton.

In 40 Hen. III. (Ibid. fol. 50), Henricus de Dones (whom I take to be
the same with Dawney) is certified to hold £15 per annum by knight’s
service.

In 3 Hen. IV. (Ibid. fol. 41) Johanna de Rame ten. 1 fe. magnum de
Seviock; probably this Joanna was the mother of the following
Nicholas, and held this estate in jointure, for this manor was at this
time his inheritance.

Nicholas Danne ten. 1 partem feod. dict. feod. de Morteynne in
Tregantle de Modeton.

Idem Nich. ten. 1 magnum feod. de Trecan et Trecarnel et Charleton de
prædict. Abbate.


THE EDITOR.

The church has the appearance of being very old, but the exterior does
not possess any beauty, and the whole is disfigured by an irregular
truncated pyramid adjoined to the western end as a tower. Within, the
church is neat although it is unusually small, but containing a series
of splendid monuments, ancient and modern.

Mr. Carew says, “The next parish on this river (the Liner) is
Sheviock, some time the ancient Daunyes’ inheritance, by whose
daughter and heir the same (together with other fair possessions)
descended to the Earls of Devon. In the church there lie two knights
of that name, and one of their ladies by her husband’s side, having
their pictures embossed on their tombs in the side walls, and their
arms once painted round about; but now, by the malice, not of men, but
of time, defaced. They are held to be father and son; and that the son
was slain in our wars with France, and was from thence brought home to
be here interred;” but Mr. Lysons conjectures that one of those
monuments is to a Courtenay.

“There runneth also a tale amongst the parishioners, how one of the
Daunyes’ ancestors undertook to build the church, and his wife the
barn adjoining; and that, casting up their accounts upon finishing of
their works, the barn was found to have cost three halfpence more than
the church: and so it might well fall out, for it is a great barn, and
a little church.” The advowson belongs to Mr. Carew’s descendant, the
Rt. Hon. R. P. Carew, of Anthony.

The barn, or what remains of it, almost adjoining to the church, adds
to the very singular appearance of the whole group. Scarcely any
remains of the mansion house, the residence for several ages of a
family so distinguished as the Dauneys, can now be discovered.

The principal village in this parish is Crofthole, situated on what
was till very lately the turnpike road from Tor Point to Leskeard, and
just at the point where the road branches off to Looe and Fowey.

This village stands nearly on the brow of a lofty cliff, down which
the road to Looe descends by repeated turnings. Mr. Lysons says the
ancient name was Croftilborowe, and that it possessed a weekly market
on Wednesdays, granted to Nicholas Dauney, then Lord of Sheviock, with
a Fair for three days at the Festival of St. James. The market has
long been discontinued. The village is at this time far from large, or
from presenting any appearance of opulence. Mr. Carew says it then
contained but twelve dwellings, and adds one of those coarse tales,
which are usually applied as jokes against any small place, endowed
with privileges or immunities above what its importance would seem to
justify.

On the edge of the sea, nearly under Croftshole, is a small pier
protecting a narrow beach of sand between rocks, called Porth Wrinkle:
it gives shelter to fishing boats and small vessels. The ancient pier,
which had stood during a great number of years, was destroyed by the
violent storm of Feb. 2, 1822. It is however replaced.

Trethil belonged for some time to the family of Wallis.

The family became represented by two brothers――

John Wallis, who had an only daughter married to Admiral Sir John
Thomas Duckworth; and Samuel Wallis, Captain in the Royal Navy, the
celebrated circumnavigator and discoverer of Otaheite. This gentleman
married Miss Betty Hearle of Penryn, and has also left an only
daughter, now the widow of the late Samuel Stephens, esq. of Tregenna
in St. Ives. Most of the recent monuments are connected with this
family.

  Sheviock measures 2122 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2787    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           418    6    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    409   |    428   |     491    |    453
    giving an increase of 10½ per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Reginald Pole, presented by the Right Hon.
    R. P. Carew in 1825.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of which this parish is composed belong to the calcareous
series, and are similar to those of the southern part of St. German’s.




SITHNEY.


HALS.

Sithney is situate in the hundred of Kerrier, and hath upon the north
Crowan, east Helleston and Gwendron, south the Loo Pool and British
Channel.

In the Domesday Book 1087, this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Trew-thall or Truthall. In the Inquisition of the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1294, into the value of the Cornish
Benefices, Ecclesia de Sancti Sithany, in decanatu de Kerryer, was
rated at £6. 6_s._ 8_d._ Vicar ibidem xxxiii_s._ iiii_d._ In Wolsey’s
Inquisition 1521, it was valued to first fruits £19. 11_s._ 4_d._ The
patronage formerly in the master or governor of St. John the Baptist’s
Hospital in this parish, who endowed it, now in the Bishop of Exeter;
the incumbent ―――― Hawkins; the rectory in possession of ―――― Paynter;
and the parish rated to the four shillings per pound Land Tax, 1696,
£147. 9_s._ by the name of Sithney.

In this parish at St. John’s formerly stood an hospital, commandery,
or preceptory, dedicated to St. John Baptist, and distinguished by the
name of the Hospital of St. John the Baptist of Jerusalem, for
Christians that were sick or wounded in the war; also for
entertainment of Christian pilgrims and travellers that came to that
city. This hospital of St. John’s in this parish was subject to the
master of St. John’s Hospital in London, as all other in England were,
and was valued at the suppression thereof 26 Henry VIII. at £12. 6_s._
8_d._ saith Dugdale, £14. 7_s._ 4_d._ Speed. This sum it seems was the
value of their rents on leases, so what their domains were I know not.

  Here the MS. is again deficient.

However, those who pretend to skill in taste and palate eating, prefer
the saltwater trout before this Loo trout; nevertheless, I take it to
be a fish of good taste and digestion, and when killed in his proper
season not inferior in redness to the sea-trout; this pool on the one
side being situate on Mr. Penrose’s lands, hath entitled him to free
fishing therein time out of mind.

But the absolute royalty and jurisdiction of this river pertained to
the ancient earls now dukes of Cornwall, or to the kings of England,
in right of their adjacent manor of Helleston in Kerryer; and for
further proof thereof, I will give an ancient testimony out of the
pleas of the Crown in the Exchequer 12 Edward I. 1282, (See also
Blount’s Ancient Tenures, from thence, p. 52.) where we may read these
words.

Wilhelmus de Trevelle tenet unam acram terræ Cornubiensem, in Degemue
et Eglesderry in Kerrier, per serjantiam inveniendi unum Batellum et
Rethiam, ad piscandum in Lacu de Helleston, quandocunque Dominus Rex
venerit apud Hellestone, et quamdiu moram ibi fecerit.

From whence I conclude that this William de Trevelle either had or was
keeper of the royalty of this lake or pool by inheritance, and held
one Cornish acre of land in Eglesderry, that is to say, one hundred
and eighty English acres by the tenure of Sergeanty for that purpose,
and providing a fishing hook or iron crook and a net, as long as the
king should stay or tarry in the manor of Helleston, fishing or so
doing. This Degemue and Eglesderry are lands in the manor of Helston
Chaumond in Kerrier. This name and tribe of Treveale are still extant
in Roach and elsewhere in Cornwall.


TONKIN.

Sithney is in the hundred of Kerrier, and is bounded to the west by
St. Breage, to the north by Crowan, to the east by Gwendon and
Helston, to the south by the British Channel.

This parish is denominated from its tutelar Saint (with a little
variation, euphoniæ gratiâ) St. Midinnia (Tax. Benef.)

It is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book £19. 11_s._ 4_d._ The
patronage in the Bishop of Exeter, the incumbent ――――.

In 1291, 20 Edw. I, the rectory of this church was valued (Tax.
Benef.) at £6. 6_s._ 8_d._ and was appropriated to the priory of
Montacute in Somersetshire; the vicarage being valued at 33_s._ 4_d._

I shall begin with


THE MANOR OF PENROSE.

The head of the valley [or rather, the Hill of the Heath,] which hath
given a name and dwelling to a very ancient family, seated there (it
is said) before the Conquest.

It is pleasantly seated on the side of the Looe Pool, which for the
most part belongs to it, of which Mr. Carew (fol. 152) thus, “Under it
(Heilston) runneth the river Lo, whose passage into the sea is
thwarted by a sandy bank, which forceth the same to quurt back a great
way, and so to make a pool of some miles in compass. It breedeth a
peculiar kind of bastard trout, in bigness and goodness exceeding such
as live in the fresh water, but coming short of those who frequent the
salt. The fore-remembered bank serveth as a bridge to deliver
wayfarers, with a compendious passage, to the other side; howbeit
sometimes with more haste than good speed, for now and then it is so
pressed on the inside with the increasing river’s weight, and a
portion of the outer sand so washed down by the waves, that at a
sudden out breaketh the upper part of the Poole and away goeth a great
deal of the sand, water, and fish, which instant, if it take any
passenger tardy, shrewdly endangereth him to flit for company, and
some have so miscarried.

    “To this Pool adjoineth Mr. Penrose his house, whose kind
    entertainment hath given me and many others experience of
    these matters. He married the daughter of Rashleigh. He
    beareth, Argent, three bends Sable, charged with nine roses
    of the Field.” But before I leave the Loo Pool, I must
    observe that the name of the river is taken from the Pool,
    for such are called Loghs or Los in our ancient tongue.
    Neither is the bar which forms it of sand; but Leland gives
    this account of it (Itin. vol. VIII. fol. 3), “Lo-Poole is a
    two miles in length, and betwixt it and the mayn se is but a
    barre of sande; and ons in three or four years, what by the
    wait of the fresch water and rage of the se, it brekith out,
    and then the fresch and salt water meting makith a wonderful
    noise; but soon after the mouth is barred again with sande.
    At other tymes the superfluitie of the water of Lo-Poole
    drenith out through the sandy barre unto the se. If this
    barre might be alway kept open, it would be a goodly haven up
    to Heilston. The commune fische of this Poole is trout and
    ele.”

The present lord of this manor is Edward Penrose, Esq. who is yet
unmarried. He succeeded Robert Corker, Esq. on his death, A.D. 1731,
as receiver of the duchy of Cornwall, and is in the Commission of the
Peace and Lieutenancy. His father, Edward Penrose, Esq. was a very
worthy good-natured gentleman, and was likewise a Justice of the
Peace. He married ――――, the daughter of James Praed, of Trevetho, Esq.
by whom he had also one daughter ――――, married to James Keigwyn, of
Mousehole, Esq. and since dead without issue. His grandfather Richard
Penrose, Esq. was Sheriff of Cornwall 17 Henry VIII.


THE EDITOR.

There is not any thing remarkable about this parish church; it is
distant no more than a mile and quarter from Breage Church, but
divided from it by a deep valley, which runs down to Porthleaven,
heretofore a small fishing cove, till some projectors induced
credulous persons to contribute large sums of money, for the purpose
of making a harbour for vessels at this place, under the vague
pretence of saving human life, a matter on which all mankind are
agreed, but without being able to show that their plans would have
that effect: assuming it, however, they had the hardihood to solicit
from Parliament an impost on all vessels passing within a certain
distance of the Land’s End and the Lizard. Several tens of thousands
of pounds have been expended on this senseless undertaking, which has
utterly failed of its object, and made the small harbour less
commodious for boats than it was before.

The principal seat in this parish is Penrose, the residence for
centuries of a very ancient family bearing the same name, till the
heiress of Penrose married Pearce of Penryn, and their only daughter
married Alexander Cuming, esq. from Scotland. They parted with this
property to Mr. John Rogers of Helston, younger brother of Mr. Hugh
Rogers of Treasow in Ludgvan, to whom he ultimately succeeded.

Mr. John Rogers left an only son Hugh Rogers, Sheriff of Cornwall in
the year 1770. This gentleman married Ann, daughter of Mr. James of
St. Columb. They also left an only son Mr. John Rogers, member of
Parliament for West Looe and for Helston: he married Margaret, eldest
daughter of Francis Basset, esq. of Tehidy: and died the 22d of
February, 1832, leaving a very numerous family. He is succeeded by his
eldest son the Rev. John Rogers, Canon Residentiary of Exeter, and
Rector of Mawnan.

The late Mr. Rogers added very considerably to the property purchased
by his grandfather, more especially on the sales by the Arundell
family; so that the Penrose domain now extends round the Lake, and
affords a scope for improvements, which may convert this place into
one of the most beautiful in Cornwall, and such are expected from the
talents, liberality, and taste of the present opulent possessor.

Antron appears to have been a place of consequence in former times.
Mr. Lysons says that it belonged to an ancient family of the same
name, from whom it passed with an heiress in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, to the Paynters; that it was purchased of them by the
Hoblyns in 1670, and sold by the Rev. Robert Hoblyn, to John Rogers,
esq. late Captain in the Naval Service of the East India Company, who
restored the place by building a new house, and by other improvements.
It now belongs to his son.

Trevarnoe was purchased by the late Mr. Christopher Wallis, a
gentleman who made a large fortune in Helston and in this place, by
the practice of the law. He had an only daughter, married to Captain
Popham, a brother of the adventurous navigator who distinguished
himself at Buenos Ayres. Their son now resides here; he served the
office of Sheriff in 1834, and has married a daughter of the late Sir
Vyell Vyvyan, of Trelowarren.

Very little is known about the hospital of St. John in this parish.
The following short notice is all that occurs in Dugdale’s Monasticon:

“Helston.――Leland, in his Itinerary, mentions an hospital of St. John
yet standing at the west-south-west end of the town of Helston, of the
foundation of one Killigion or Killegrew. It is mentioned in the
Register of Edmund Stafford, Bishop of Exeter (from 1395 to 1419) fol.
135. In the 26th of Henry VIII. the total revenue of this hospital
amounted to £14. 7_s._ 4_d._ The net receipts to £12. 16_s._ 4_d._ per
annum.” At the foot of the hill, and on the south side of the road
leading from Mirazion, just as it turns almost at a right angle, is a
large stone placed upright, bearing in relief the sword of St. John,
having its guard in such a position as to represent the potence of a
cross; and this stone is believed to point out very nearly the site of
the ancient hospital.

The great tithes of this parish were appropriated to the monastery of
Glaseney, near Penryn; they have since the reformation passed through
different hands, and belong to Sir Samuel-Thomas Spry, M.P. for
Bodmin, son of the late Admiral Spry.

The present incumbent is the Rev. Samuel Cole, D.D. Chaplain General
to the Navy. About a century ago this living was held, together with
Phillack and Gwithian, by the Rev. Edward Collins, the Editor’s
great-grandfather.

The parish feast is kept on the first Sunday in August.

  Sithney measures 4896 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          5,839    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           904   14    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {   1420   |   1552   |    2238    |   2772
    giving an increase of 95 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish extends from near Wendron Church almost to the Loo Bar, in
the form of a long stripe running a little west of south; rather more
than a quarter part of this stripe, at its northern extremity, rests
on granite; all the remainder belongs to rocks of the porphyritic
series. The extensive workings of Whele Vor mine are partly situated
in this parish, which is intersected by numerous veins and courses of
porphyry.




SOUTHILL.


This parish will be found in vol. II. p. 229.




ST. STEPHEN’S IN BRANNEL.


HALS.

St. Stephen’s in Brannel is situate in the hundred of Powder, and hath
upon the north Roach and St. Denis, east St. Mewan, west Probus, south
Creed.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the
value of Cornish Benefices 1294, Ecclesia de Sancti Stephani, in
decanatu de Powdre, was rated at £8. 7. 5_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition
1221, it was valued to First Fruits, together with St. Denis and
Carhayes, and goes in consolidation and presentation with it, £27.
10_s._ 6½_d._ as a rectory, and for the vicarages of St. Stephen’s and
St. Denis £14.; in all £41. 10_s._ 6½.: all which churches were
endowed by Richard Earl of Cornwall, King of the Romans, who annexed
the patronage thereof to his lordship and manor of Branel aforesaid.
The patronage now in Tanner; the incumbent Tanner: to which rectory of
St. Michael Caryhayes those vicarages are appropriated or
impropriated, and the rectories thereof for life. This parish was
rated to the four shillings per pound Land Tax 1696, £283. 4_s._ 9_d._
But whether those vicarages are obliged to the residence of the said
rector for certain times with cura animarum, or are sinecures, I know
not.

Court in this parish is the chief barton of the manor and lordship of
Brannel, both which appertained to the Earls of Cornwall in right of
that earldom; which King John, who also was Earl of Cornwall, settled
upon his second son Richard, born in the 11th year of his reign, Anno
Dom. 1209, afterwards King of the Romans, who had issue by his
concubine Joan de Valletorta, widow of Sir Alexander Oakeston
aforesaid, a base son named Richard de Cornwall, (and a daughter named
Joan, married to Champernowne) on whom he settled this manor of
Brannel and barton of Court; who had issue Wiliam de Cornwall or
Plantagenet, and Geffery de Cornwall, afterwards knighted by King
Edward I. ancestor of the famous family of the Cornwalls of Burford in
Shropshire, whose posterity had been twenty-two times sheriffs of
those counties and Bedfordshire to the 10th of King James.

Boden-ike aforesaid, was formerly the lands of Pye, who sold it to
Tanner; some of which family afterwards, in the interregnum of
Cromwell, turned decimators and sequestrators with the Sprys, upon the
lands and revenues of the royal laity and clergy of this county, to
that degree of hurt and damage, that it occasioned the making of that
short litany not yet forgotten in Cornwall:

  “From the Pyes and the Spryes, good Lord, deliver us.”

The arms of Pye are, Argent, on a fess Azure three escallops of the
Field.

Lastly, in this place, to refresh the tired reader, I will recount a
story of the unfortunate amours of John Tanner aforesaid, with his
lady Madam Windham, to whom he made his first addresses of marriage,
and after some time good liking fell deeply into each other’s
affection; but the conditions of marriage proposed by Mr. Tanner not
being hastily agreed upon by her father Mr. Windham, gave opportunity
to Charles Speccott, esq. a gentleman of much greater estate than Mr.
Tanner had, to make an overture of marriage to the lady aforesaid,
together with a larger settlement in jointure than Mr. Tanner was able
to grant or perform; which proposals were forthwith accepted by Mr.
Windham, so that he soon after constrained his daughter,
notwithstanding what amours had passed between her and Mr. Tanner, to
marry Mr. Speccott.

At the news of which cross accident, Mr. Tanner, her former inamorato,
was so discontented and perplexed in mind, that in order to quiet his
disturbed soul, and obliterate or extinguish the memory of this
beautiful woman (for such she was), he forsook this land and travelled
into France.

In brief, Tanner, having been eighteen months in France,
notwithstanding the variety of faces and company he met with, grew
there also discontented with himself, and a continual impulse lay upon
his spirit which he could not suppress, that he must return back again
into England, for what reason he knew not; whereupon he went on board
a ship, and came safe into the port of London, where he had not
remained scarce ten days before he heard of the news of Mr. Speccott’s
death within that time; upon which intelligence he forthwith posted
from London to Thornbury in Devon, where she then resided in a
mourning state, who received him in such joyful and welcome manner,
that soon after the marriage was concluded betwixt them, by whom he
had a great estate as aforesaid,


TONKIN.

St. Stephen’s in Brannel is in the hundred of Powder, and hath to the
west Ladock, to the north St. Dennis and Roche, to the east St.
Austell and St. Mewan, to the south St. Probus and Creed. This church
and the two following ones are dedicated to the famous protomartyr St.
Stephen, and have their different adjuncts, to distinguish them the
one from the other.

As it is a rectory, it is with St. Denis a daughter church to St.
Michael Carhays, and valued, together with it, in the King’s Book, at
£27. 0_s._ 0_d._, but as it hath a vicarage joined with it likewise,
it is the mother church to St. Dennis, and valued with it in the
King’s Book, at £14. The rectory and vicarage have both the same
patron, Thomas Pitt, esq. (purchased by governor Pitt, from the heirs
and assigns of John Tanner, esq.); and at this time the same
incumbent, Mr. William Sutton; who keeps a curate here, at present Mr.
William Wood, junior, to serve this church and St. Denis, and makes it
up to him (I speak it to his praise) the best curacy in this county.

I shall begin with that great manor, from whence this parish hath its
adjunct of distinction.


THE MANOR OF BRANNEL.

In Carew, (fol. 47), in the extent of Cornish acres, Beranel is valued
in thirty-six, the 12 Edw. I.

I take this to be the same which is called in Doomsday Book Bernel,
being one of the manors given by William the Conqueror to Robert Earl
of Morton, when he made him Earl of Cornwall,


WHITAKER.

There is a very striking singularity in the nature of the present
parish, which is but slightly or hardly noticed, by Mr. Tonkin. It has
been taken out of the parish of Carhayes, and yet is actually distant
from it. It is considered as one living with Carhayes, and yet has
Probus and Creed in a first line, Tregony and Cuby in a second, Veryan
and St. Ewe in a third, successively coming betwixt Carhayes and it.
It is now held with St. Dennis as its daughter, and Carhayes as its
mother, by a clergyman who holds Boconnock and Braddock as one church,
together with it; and who therefore stands forward to the curious eye,
a most singular instance under the present forms of ecclesiastical
law, of one man lawfully possessing five churches. But how is all this
phenomenon in parochial formations to be accounted for? It can be
accounted for, I think, only in this manner. The manor of Carhayes was
originally a royal one, I suppose. The house was therefore the seat
occasionally of our Cornish kings. It was a seat peculiarly
frequented, I also suppose, for the sake of the adjoining forest of
Brannel. And the donation of Brannel by William the Conqueror to
Robert Earl of Morton, when he made him Earl of Cornwall, proves it to
have been in the hands of the Crown at the time, and intimates it to
have been a part of the Cornish demesnes originally. The lands that
had belonged to the Cornish Crown, would certainly be attached to the
English, on the suppression of kings, and would assuredly be conferred
on the Earldom of Cornwall, when the Kings were succeeded by Earls. In
this condition of the parish and the forest, when the latter was
annexed to the house, and so became a part of the former, any house
that was raised in the forest for the temporary reception of the king,
was necessarily considered to be as much in the parish as it was in
the manor. When other houses were built, and a perpetual inhabitancy
took place in them, a chapel was naturally erected for the
participation of the inhabitants in divine offices, and the rector of
Carhayes was called upon to officiate in person or by proxy at it; in
person while the king was there, by proxy when he was not. And he had
the tithes of this newly cultivated part of the woodland, to repay him
for his trouble or his expense. This accounts satisfactorily, I think,
for the strange extension of the parochial compasses here. One leg was
centered at the house of Carhayes, and therefore the other stretched
over all the intermediate regions, and took its footing on the
woodland of Brannel beyond. Nothing but the regality of both could
have permitted such a vast stride as this. A Neptune may stalk from
promontory to promontory, and a king may take a colossal step from
Carhayes to Brannel. The very name too seems to concur with all this:
called Bernel, Beranel, and Brannel, and originally belonging to the
crown, it speaks the royal relationship at once; Brenhin, or Brennin
(W.) being a king, brennyn, brein, brenn (C.) royal, Bran being the
Welsh name for the famous Brenhind (W.) and consequently brennol (C.)
once, being kingly or royal. The house also at Carhayes has a royal
kind of appearance with it, being built in the old style of grandeur
round a court having a chapel, a wall, and all the uncomfortable
vastness of a princely house. In this manner did St. Stephen’s go on
to form a new kind of parish, by encroaching upon the royal woodland,
and peopling these gloomy deserts. Considered at first as a chapelry
to Carhayes, it was valued with it in 1291. It afterwards became
parochiated, and is valued as a distinct parish in the Valor of Henry
VIII.; but before the period of this second Valor, St. Dennis, which
was wholly unknown in 1291, had risen upon St. Stephen’s, just as St.
Stephen’s had risen upon Carhayes before. The daughter of Carhayes
thus became a mother to St. Dennis; and the wildest and remotest part
of this antient forest of our kings coming to be peopled, and
requiring a church for its inhabitants, St. Stephen’s stands in the
new Valor, accompanied with its chapel of St. Dennis.

N. B. The only variation from the account here given, is what a sight
of Pope Nicholas’s Valor has suggested to me. There Caerhayes is not
mentioned at all. The only church noticed is “Ecclesia Sancti
Stephani.” This, therefore, included Caerhayes, then the larger
included the smaller; and Caerhayes, which is little more (I believe)
as a parish, than its own demense and park, (which, as royal demesne,
I suppose, was not parochiated,) became annexed to St. Stephen’s, when
this was parochiated,――when, therefore, the royal relation of both had
ceased; and was so annexed in the Valor of 1291. June 16, 1794.


THE EDITOR.

This parish, like the other dedicated to St. Stephen, has a lofty
tower placed, with the church, in a position commanding the adjacent
country, which retains, however, much of its former character; yet
cultivation is gradually extending itself here, as in other wild
tracts of Cornwall, through the medium of potatoe cultivation; but if
the mines should fail, or if the system itself goes to a great extent,
we have a tremendous example before our eyes of the inevitable
consequences resulting from this subdivision of property.

The church contains but one monument of any curiosity, and that is to
the memory of Doctor Hugh Wolrige, a physician who died in 1652.

  Ingenuas didicit (quas optimè coluit) artes;
    Ægrotis didicit pharmaca sana dare,
  In Christo didicit tantum succumbere morti,
    Desinit ulterius discere Doctor Hugo.

This is accompanied by an English inscription in quaint rhymes, from
which it appears, that after quitting Cambridge he went to complete
his medical education at Breda, where the miasmata of that unhealthy
country so injured his constitution as to close his days at the early
period of thirty years.

The epitaph states him to have been born at Penkevill, but the family
were seated at Garlenick in Creed, and there, eighty years afterwards,
John Wolrige, esq. is found among the subscribers to Martyn’s Map of
Cornwall, but deceased before the map appeared in 1748.

  St. Stephen’s in Brannel measures 8,556 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           6696    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          1190    5    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {   1738   |   1904   |    2479    |    2477
    giving an increase of 42½ per cent. in 30 years.

It may be remarked, that the increase was rather more in the first
twenty years, an anomaly in all likelihood occasioned by the
fluctuation in mining concerns, and to the preparation of China clay
having reached its limit.

If the increase had uniformly continued for a century at this rate,
the population at the end of that time would reach the great number of
14,635.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

A line drawn N. W. and S. E. about a mile due N. from the church,
would divide this parish into nearly two equal parts, the northern
parts consisting of granite, and the southern of schistose rocks,
belonging to the porphyritic series.

The granite stretches completely across the large central mass of this
district, and contains many varieties. Next to the slate, the rock
generally contains a considerable portion of shorl, which sometimes
takes the place of the mica altogether; both of these kinds abound in
large veins and courses of quartz and shorl rock. But the most
abundant variety is that extensively decomposed into a white friable
mass; of this substance the more compact and perfect parts are
quarried, and exported under the name of China stone, whilst the
earthy parts are washed to separate the fine argillaceous particles
from the grains of quartz, and from other hard minerals with which
they are mixed in their natural state. The water, rendered white like
milk by this operation, is received in large pits, where the earthy
part subsides, and then after being dried is sent to the potteries
under the name of China clay. The manipulations which this substance
undergoes during its preparation are simple, but very tedious; and
they afford employment to several hundred persons. The extent of this
branch of commerce is so great, that about seven thousand tons of
clay, and five thousand tons of China stone are exported from Cornwall
every year, of which by far the greater part is raised in this parish.

The rocks of the slate series are similar to those of St. Mewan and
St. Austell, containing also metalliferous veins.




ST. STEPHEN’S NEAR LAUNCESTON.


HALS.

St. Stephen’s near Launceston, is situated in the hundred of East, and
hath upon the north Werrington, east the Tamer river, south
Launceston, west St. Thomas.

At the time of the Norman Conquest, this district (in the Domesday
Book 1087,) was taxed under the jurisdiction of Lan-san, or Lan-sen,
i. e. signifying a holy church or temple, though at that time this
superior church had in this place a famous collegiate church dedicated
to St. Stephen, consisting of secular priests, who might marry wives,
founded and endowed by the Bishops of Bodman, and Earls of Cornwall,
long before William the Conqueror’s days. Reginald Fitz-Harry, base
son of King Henry I. by Anne Corbet, created Earl of Cornwall by King
Stephen, in the 5th year of his reign 1140, was a great benefactor to
this collegiate church; and besides all that, endeavoured with all his
power and interest with King Stephen to bring back the bishopric of
Cornwall, transferred or translated to Kirton and Exeter, and fix the
bishop’s see and cathedral in this place and church of St. Stephen
1150, which Robert Warlewast, then Bishop of Exeter, opposed; and in
his first triennial visitation of the Cornish Diocese from Lanwhitton,
came and visited this collegiate church, and suppressed the order of
secular priests conversing at large in the world, not tied to monastic
life, and in the room of them brought in black monks or canons
Augustine (see St. Anthony,) and converted this church and college
into an abbey or priory of monks, by the name of the abbey or priory
of St. Stephen’s, whose governor was indifferently called the abbat
and prior of St. Stephen’s and Launceston.

And to this purpose we read in the first inquisition into the value of
Cornish Benefices before-mentioned 1294, these words: Prior de
Lanceston precipit de Vicar’ de Lankinhorne, xxvi_s._ viii_d._ Those
monks before that inquisition, out of a covetous desire after wealth
and riches, which they had obtained by gift or purchase, had wholly
impropriated and turned into small vicarages the revenues of all such
churches as to their abbey were annexed, and of which they were
patrons.

None of which churches’ revenues, because wholly impropriated before
the first inquisition, are rated or named in the Pope’s or King’s
Books of First Fruits to this day. This parish of St. Stephen’s was
rated to the four shillings per pound Land Tax 1696, £174. 18_s._

In this parish are kept annually three fairs or public marts, viz. the
1st May, the 20th of July, and the 14th of September.

In this parish or Launceston was also a Friary.


TONKIN.

St. Stephen’s, near Launceston, lies in the hundred of East, and is
bounded to the west by Egloskerry and Trewenn, to the north the River
Artrie and part of Devonshire, to the east by the Tamar, to the south
by Launceston, St. Thomas, and St. Pedyrwyn.

This church is not at all valued in the King’s Book; but in the
Taxatio Benefic. in anno 1291, 20 Edward I. being totally appropriated
to the Priory of Launceston, it is valued at £10.


THE EDITOR.

The history relating to the more ancient ecclesiastical establishments
in this parish does not seem to be very clear or distinct, although
the general facts are well ascertained, and accord with the prevailing
spirit of the times in which they occurred.

William Warlewast, who held the see of Exeter about twenty years in
the beginning of the twelfth century, suppressed a college of secular
priests attached to St. Stephen’s Church, and founded a monastery of
regular monks near the place where St. Thomas’s Church now stands.
This house he endowed with the lands of the former college, and
dedicated it to the same saint. It was constituted a priory of the
order of St. Austin, and remained till the general dissolution.

Mr. Lysons treats of the three parishes together, as Launceston and
St. Thomas were originally portions of St. Stephen’s; and there is
scarcely a doubt but that the Cornish having by some accident adopted
the Greek name of the Protomartyr, called the church of Dunheved,
Lan-Stephanon, or Stephen’s Church, which easily glided into Lanston,
written Launceston; but in this, as in a thousand other instances, the
common pronunciation approaches nearer to the true origin of a name,
than the established orthography, as Excester much more corresponds
with a camp on the Ex than Exeter.

In St. Stephen’s and in St. Thomas’s, the parishioners nominate the
perpetual curates; and the latter parish is tithe free.

The church of St. Stephen, although it cannot reach back nearly to the
time of the college suppressed by Bishop Warlewast, is yet on a scale
superior to most others; and seated on an eminence with a lofty tower,
it presents an object worthy of associating with the superb keep of
Launceston Castle.

There is an inscription within the Church, recording the munificence
of Charles Cheney, Lord Viscount Newhaven, then Member for Newport, in
re-building a part of the fabric, and probably in repairing the
remainder according to the ill taste prevalent about the early part of
the eighteenth century, so as to make the interior of the Church quite
at variance with its exterior Gothic.

The late Sir Jonathan Phillips inhabited a good house adjoining the
street, which, with the attached property, has since been united to
the great political influence of the place.

The barton of Carnedon, an ancient possession of the Blighes, and
afterwards of the Cloberrys, is now the property of Thomas Bewes,
Esq.; and the barton of Tredidon, formerly a seat of a family bearing
the same name, is now the residence of George-Francis-Collins Browne,
Esq. who assumed the latter name on succeeding to the property of his
maternal grandfather, Mr. George Brown, of Bodmin.

The modern history of this parish chiefly relates to the borough of
Newport, and to its connection with the adjacent parish and seat of
Werrington.

Newport is little more than a street of Launceston, extending, with
some interruption, to the northward. Its political importance must
have grown out of the religious establishments.

Various accounts are given by Browne Willis and others respecting the
ancient constitution of this borough; but it had practically arrived
at the state of a burgage tenure; and two officers elected by a homage
in the Lord’s Court presided over the elections. They were denominated
vianders; but no such word occurs in any usual books of reference.

Werrington appears to have belonged entirely to the Abbey of
Tavistock. At the time of the dissolution the manor paid £141. 17_s._
11_d._ And under another head is this entry: Worrington――Pensio de
Ecclesia Sancti Martini £2. 10_s._

The barton is known to have been one of the country residences
appropriated to the Lord Abbat, to whom the mitre was granted by a
papal bull in the reign of Henry the Sixth, and on whom King Henry the
Eighth, in consideration of the especial devotion which he bore
towards the Blessed Virgin Mary, mother of Christ, and to St. Rumon,
bestowed the privileges of a spiritual lord of Parliament in the fifth
year of his reign.

At Werrington the Lord Abbat had a deer park, which still remains in
existence, his piscatories, and all the appendages suited to a feudal
baron.

This property, together with all the other possessions of the
monastery, passed by a grant from King Henry the Eighth, in the 31st
year of his reign, to the family of Russel, with whom a considerable
part of this immense largess still remains; but Werrington was sold to
a successor of the renowned circumnavigator Sir Francis Drake, who
parted with it to Sir William Morris. This gentleman was the son of a
clergyman from Wales, who had obtained a Canonry of Exeter; and he
rose in station and in fortune by an early and close intimacy with
General Monk, when that military adventurer sacrificed not only his
political associates, but the liberties of his country, even to
the Petition of Rights, for the purpose of assuring his own
aggrandisement, a misconduct which entailed on the nation all the
doubtful and vacillating struggles in the reign of Charles the Second,
and demanded for its final remedy the glorious Revolution of 1688.
Werrington continued in Sir William Morris’s family till the year
1775, when it was sold to Sir Hugh Smithson, created Duke of
Northumberland in consequence of his marriage with Elizabeth only
daughter of Charles Seymour, Duke of Somerset, and of Elizabeth, sole
daughter and heir of Josceline Percy, Earl of Northumberland. The Duke
of Northumberland wishing to pursue the path of ambition which then
lay open to any man of wealth, acquired with Werrington the commanding
property at Newport and the influence at Launceston, and having made a
similar acquisition lower down on the banks of the Tamar, he had the
satisfaction of attaining the objects kept steadily in his view.

Although the parish of Werrington is completely in Devonshire, and is
believed to have formed a part of the original endowment of Tavistock
Abbey by Ordgar Earl of Devonshire about the year 960; yet in
spiritual matters it forms a part of the Archdeaconry of Cornwall. At
the last census this parish contained sixty-six inhabitants; and the
annual value of the Real Property was returned in 1815 at £2809.

St. Stephen’s, with its little town of Newport, are obviously too near
Launceston to allow of their possessing any separate market. Three
fairs are, however, holden, as is not unusual in the suburbs of most
towns.

As so few persons attain the age of a hundred years, it may be worth
remarking, that the Editor remembers, about fifty years ago, an aged
person called Sarah Coat, in the service of Sir Jonathan Phillips’s
family. She lived to 1814, and completed her hundred and fourth year.

  This parish measures 3401 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          3,467    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           430   18    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821,  | in 1831,
              {    738   |    896   |     977    |   1084
    giving an increase of 47 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Perpetual Curate, the Rev. C. H. Lethbridge, presented by
    the Trustees in 1818; net income in 1831, £80.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The eastern part of this parish resembles Launceston in its geological
structure; the western part rests on that range of downs which here
cross the country, and which have been already noticed under the heads
of Laneast and Egloskerry.




ST. STEPHEN’s NEAR SALTASH.


HALS.

St. Stephen’s near Saltash is situate in the hundred of East, and hath
upon the east and south the Tamar River or part of Plymouth Harbour,
north Bloflemmen, west Landrake, or that part of it called St. Urny.
In the Domesday Book 1087, this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Trematon. In the inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln
and Winchester into the value of Cornish Benefices, Ecclesia de Sancti
Stephani, in decanatu de Est, was rated at £9. 6_s._ 8_d._ In Wolsey’s
Inquisition 1521, £26. The patronage formerly in ――――, now Buller;
the incumbent ――――; the rectory in possession of ――――.

This parish was rated to the four shillings per pound Land

  Tax for one year 1696,      £457. 19_s._ 0_d._
  Saltash Borough              128   6     0
                               ―――――――――――――
                               586   5     0
                               ―――――――――――――

In this parish stands the castle, honour, and manor of Trematon.

This lordship was the King or Earl of Cornwall’s manor of land beyond
the records of time, and in particular, after Cornwall was dismembered
from Devon by King Athelstan, Anno Dom. 930, of Ailmer, or Athellmaur
or Athellmer, i. e. muac, great, or noble, for so the Monasticon
Anglicanum, Anno Dom. 980, in tom. 1, page 258, calls him, afterwards
of Algar Earl of Cornwall, Anno Dom. 1046. (Monasticon, page 1022)
Then of Condura, or Condorus in Latin, who was Earl of Cornwall, when
William Duke of Normandy invaded this land 1066, who as some say
submitted to his jurisdiction, by paying him homage for his earldom,
and swearing fealty to him; which history seems not very concordant
with reason or truth; since in the second year of the Conqueror’s
reign he was by him deprived of this dignity, who gave the same to
Robert Guelam, Earl of Morton in Normandy, brother to King William by
his mother Arlotte, who had issue William Earl of Morton and Cornwall,
that entered into treasonable practises on behalf of Robert Duke of
Normandy, against William Rufus and Henry I. and so lost both those
earldoms, and died about the year 1035. After whose death in all
probability, Caddock, though some call him Condorus II. son of
Condura, was restored to the earldom of Cornwall, and lived and died
in this place, whose only daughter and heir Agnes, or Beatrix as
others call her, was married to Reginald Fitz Harry, base son of King
Henry First, by his concubine Anne, daughter of Robert Corbet of
Allencester, in the county of Warwick, who was in her right created
Earl of Cornwall by King Stephen, in the 5th year of his reign 1140.

Shillingham, in this parish, after the English, is a dwelling covered
with slatestones; after the Saxon, it is a corruption of sylenhan, i.
e. the paying, selling, or giving house, home, or dwelling; after the
British, Sillan or Cillanham, i. e. the chapel house or dwelling;
which gave name and original to an old family of gentlemen, from
thence surnamed de Shillingham; whose heir, as I am informed, in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth’s reign, was married to Francis Buller,
esq. a younger branch of the Bullers of [Lillesdon in Somersetshire];
he was Sheriff of Cornwall 42 Elizabeth, who had issue Richard Buller,
esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 9 James I. who had issue Richard Buller, esq.
afterwards knighted, Sheriff of Cornwall 12 Charles I. 1637, who had
issue Francis Buller, esq. that married the sole inheritrix of Ezekiel
Gross of Golden, gent. Attorney at Law; by whom he had issue John
Buller, esq. who married ―――― and had issue ――――, that died
without issue; whereupon, John Buller of Morval, esq. that married
Coode, second son of Sir Richard Buller aforesaid, succeeded to this
estate, and is now in possession thereof; who had issue as is set
forth in Morval parish.

Lastly, let it not be forgotten, that Francis Buller, esq. that
married Gross aforesaid, entertained for his chaplain one Mr. D.
Eaton, a priest that officiated Divine Service in his house, after the
manner of the Church of England, tempore Charles II. and was so kind
and respectful towards this doctor, that he made him his companion and
amicus, and reposed more confidence in his integrity than he had
reason to do; for this fellow, upon some discontent, went from Mr.
Buller, and made oath before some justice of the Peace, or preferred
an accusation of treasonable words in the Crown Office, spoken by Mr.
Buller at his table against King Charles the Second’s Government, at
such time as he was his domestic chaplain.

Whereupon, Mr. Buller was taken into custody, and examined before the
King and Council, and thereupon committed prisoner to the Tower of
London; at length indicted and tried at the King’s Bench Bar at
Westminster, upon this information of Eaton’s, and found guilty of
misprision of treason by the Grand and Petty Jurors; and accordingly
was sentenced by the Judges to pay to the King a fine of thirty
thousand pounds, and to remain a prisoner during the King’s pleasure.
Now, in order to raise this money, it occasioned the selling of the
manor and lordship of Fentongollan, (See St. Michael Penkivell) though
much dismembered before, to the value of five thousand pounds, by its
former proprietors, John Hals and Carmenow, out of which the manor of
Tregothnan was made, to Hugh Boscawen, esq.

The articles of which bargain so distasted John Buller, esq. son of
the said Francis, that to obstruct the sale of that lordship, which
was his mother’s lands, he forsook this kingdom, and went into France,
where he remained for three years’ space, saying, he would rather sell
Shillingham and Golden than Fentongallan (for at that time was extant
upon it a spacious dwelling house, a tower of three or four stories
high, and a consecrated free chapel), which had been the seat of
several famous families.

But alas! let man pretend or intend what he will, fate or destiny is
unavoidable; for by reason of his father’s circumstances, and to
comply with his desire, at length he returned into England, and then
was concluded with his father in a deed of sale of the premises by
lease and release, for about the consideration of seven thousand
pounds, to Hugh Boscawen, esq. and executed the same, in presence of
the writer of these lines, at Mowpass Passage, about the year 1676,
and soon after levied a fine for cognizance de droit to dock the
entail, and bar his heirs for ever. Afterwards, his father Mr. Buller,
to raise the remainder of his said fine to the King, sold much other
lands to make up the first payment thereof, and was forced to settle
all his other estates in the hands of trustees, for raising the
remainder, confining himself to an annuity of £180 during his life.
Whereupon, having his liberty granted him by King Charles, he removed
into Oxfordshire; where, through trouble of mind, arising from this
sad accident by a malicious and perfidious priest, he grew delirious,
or in a phrenzy, and died about the year 1679.

Earth, in this parish, gave name and original to an old family of
gentlemen, from thence surnamed de Earth, in which place Galfridus de
Earth held by the tenure of knight service a knight’s fee of land, 3
Henry IV. (Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page 41.) From the heirs of
which Geffrey, by marriage, this barton descended to William Bond,
esq. now in possession thereof, that married ―――― ――――; his father
Carter, of St. Colomb, his grandfather Fountain, his great-grandfather
Fitz, and giveth for his arms, in a field Argent, on a chevron Sable
three Bezants.

Wy-ville-comb in this parish, signifies the sacred or consecrated vill
or manor comb, which place gave name to an old family of gentlemen,
from thence surnamed de Wivell, whose heir in marriage, as I am
informed, brought those lands to the genteel family of Wills; the
present possessor Francis Wills, esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 6th of
William III.


TONKIN.

St. Stephen’s juxta Saltash is in the hundred of East, and joins to
the west with St. Erney and Lanrake, to the north with Botus-Fleming,
to the south it is washed by the Lyner, as to the east by the Tamar.

This church is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book at £26. the
patronage in the Dean and Chapter of Windsor.

In anno 1291, 20 Edward I. this church was valued (Taxat. Benef.) at
£9. 6_s._ 8_d._ and is appropriated to the College of Windsor.

And as most of the lands in this parish, if not all, are held from the
Great Duchy Manor in it, I shall begin with


THE MANOR OF TREMATON,

called in Domesday Book Tremetone, “ibi habet comes unum Castrum et
Mercatum.”

It is called in the extent of Cornish acres, 20 (12) Edw. I. (Carew,
fol. 48 b.) in 80. It is said (id. fol. 41 b.) that “Aqua de Tamar,
di. feod. in manu Regis de honore de Trematon;” from whence I guess
that this manor was likewise in Henry IV.’s hands, this being in the
3d of his reign; of which see what hath been said in Leskeard; and
from its being called in Domesday Book Tremeton, and by Mr. Carew
sometimes (ibid. fol. 41.) Tremerton, I guess that the original name
was Tremerton, the great dwelling on the hill.


THE EDITOR.

The church and tower of this parish, rival in their position and in
their general appearance those of St. Stephen’s near Launceston.
Within the church are several monuments to the Bullers and other
ancient inhabitants. Among them is one to Jane, the wife of William
Bond of Earth, esq. who died in the year 1640. But the great curiosity
of this parish is Trematon Castle, one of the fortified residences of
the Earls of Cornwall, while they exercised feudal sovereignty within
their dominions.

Mr. Hals and Mr. Tonkin have given histories rather of the earls and
of their adventures, than of the castle itself and descriptions of its
present appearance may be found in all the various writers on
Cornwall: these have therefore been omitted.

Mr. Edward King in his celebrated work, Munimenta Antiqua, or
Observations on Antient Castles, vol. III. after ascribing the most
remote antiquity to Launceston Castle, which, for various reasons, he
carries back beyond the Roman Invasion, especially indicates various
points of distinction between the general construction of that
fortress, and those of the Saxons and Normans. He then says,

“Trematon Castle, in the very same county of Cornwall, which may with
good reason be concluded to have been built by Robert Earl of Moreton,
is a true Norman structure. And there cannot be a greater contrast
than there is between it and Launceston. Like Tunbridge Castle, it is
placed, not on a high natural rock, but on an artificial mount, and is
no less than sixty feet in diameter on the inside.” See the views of
it in Borlase’s Antiquities, Second Edition, p. 354, Plate 31, and in
Grose’s Supplement to his Antiquities.

There does not appear to be any real military history connected with
this fortress. It proved an insecure place of refuge during the
insurrection of 1549, raised by Humphry Arundell and others in favour
of the old religion.

The castle was for some time occupied as subfeudatories by the Barons
de Valletorta, so called, it is said, from the narrow winding valley,
which descends from the castle wall towards the south.

Roger de Valletort, Reginald, Ralph, Reginald, and Roger, appear to
have possessed or occupied Trematon from about the year 1180, through
nearly the whole of the next century.

This fine ruin has within a few years received a most material injury,
at least in the opinion of all antiquaries, by the building of a
modern house in its Basse Court.

Although the castle is fallen into decay, the privileges of the honor
and manor to which this residence gave its name, still continue in
full vigour, possessing as royalties the whole river Tamar, from some
point above the castle to Plymouth Sound, with the coast below
high-water mark on such parts of the opposite shore as are not held
against them by immemorial usage, which makes it the more strange that
Voltersholm (new-named Mount Edgecumbe by the first gentleman of that
family who acquired it) should be politically considered as in
Devonshire.

Not far from Trematon Castle, and evidently an appendage to it, is
situated the Town of Saltash.

After the entire change of manners and habits, of political
institutions and of property, which have taken place since the feudal
times, it is difficult now to conjecture why all the villages adjacent
to baronial castles were favoured with municipal bodies and with
corporate rights; institutions quite hostile to the gloomy and
solitary grandeur of the chiefs by whom these privileges were
bestowed. Perhaps they were found indispensable for the protection of
persons necessary, in the rudest times, for the supply of articles of
commerce, of manufacture, and even of subsistence, against the
violence of retainers, who in those days supplied the want of a more
regular force, always required in some shape or manner for the support
of authority, and for the maintenance of civilized society.

Saltash, under the name of Esse, received its first charter of
incorporation, as it appears on the authority of Doctor Robert Brady,
from a source which seems in modern times wholly inadequate to bestow
the gift, since the offices of Duke, Earl, and Baron have long ceased
to exist in England, and these appellations, the shadows of a shade of
times past by, are only known as matters of mere compliment given to
the private gentlemen who now sit and vote in the Upper House of
Parliament, by virtue of Letters Patent from the King. But when this
charter was bestowed, the Baron de Valletorta, although the vassal of
a vassal of the King of England, was yet a Prince within his small
domain.

This charter, confirmed by the Earl of Cornwall, and others
substantiated by the supreme chief, raised into a borough town sending
members to Parliament, with a mayor, alderman, and common council, a
long narrow street, descending to the river at such an inclination as
to make it quite inaccessible to a loaded carriage.

Modern improvements have however reached the Ville de Esse; a good
road is made round the south side of the town, and a large vessel
denominated a floating bridge, propelled by steam acting on wheels
connected with two strong chains extended across the bottom of the
river, conveys passengers and carriages at all times, and
independently of the tide, and even of the strongest winds, to the
Devonshire side, where a road is now forming along the banks of the
Tamar, with causeways, so as to convert a communication with Plymouth
over three or four hills, into nearly a complete level way.

The borough, which, in consequence of recent decisions of the House of
Commons, had become one of close nomination, has disappeared in the
great change of 1832.

Of the principal seats in the parish, Shillingham continues to be the
nominal residence of Mr. James Wentworth Buller of Downs.

Earth, the ancient seat of the Bonds, has passed through the Cornocks
of Treworgy, in St. Clear, to the Rev. Lewis Marshall. The family of
Bond is represented at present by Mr. Bond of Looe, and by the Bonds
of Dorsetshire, who shared the patronage of Corfe Castle with Mr.
Bankes, and of whom the late Mr. Nathaniel Bond was a member of the
Privy Council.

Ince Castle has-been purchased by Mr. Alexander Baring. The house is
situated almost on an island in the river, and in the semblance of a
fortress is flanked by a tower at each of the four angles, which have
probably given rise to a tale of their having been constructed for a
purpose in strict conformity with the Mahometan Law, but most happily
at complete variance from our own.

  This parish measures 5430 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.    _s._   _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815.
      The parish                             9253     0      0
      The town                               2473     0      0
  Poor Rate in 1831. The parish              1030    11      0
                     The town                 458     0      0
  Population,      in 1801, in 1811, in 1821, in 1831,
      The parish, {  1004  |  1121 |   1325  |  1455
      The town,   {  1150  |  1478 |   1548  |  1637
    giving an increase on the parish of 45 per cent. On the town of
      42½ per cent. On both of 44 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. T. B. Edwards, presented by T. Edwards, esq.
    in 1833.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The rocks of this parish belong to the calcareous series, and are
similar to those of the neighbouring parishes of Landulph, Landrake,
and St. German’s.




ERRATA

VOLUME III.

  P. 30, line 20, _for_ towers, _read_ tors.
  P. 55, line 12, _for_ scale, _read_ scales.
  P. 85, line 7 from the foot, _for_ thus, _read_ then.
  P. 86, line 10, _for_ Whilstone, _read_ Whitstone.
  P. 87, lines 14 and 18, _for_ Perkin, _read_ Parkin.
  P. 88, line 16, _for_ Heckens, _read_ Hechins.
  P. 91, line 7, _for_ Heckins, _read_ Hechins.
  P. 136, last line, _for_ Modford, _read_ Madford.
  P. 138, lines 28, 29, _dele_ the present rector.
  P. 178, line 15, _for_ St. Ives, _read_ St. Ive.
  P. 230, line 21, _for_ eria, _read_ erica.
  P. 307, line 22, _for_ Episcopus, _read_ Episcopi.
  P. 350, line 27, _for_ Troad, _read_ Trood.
  P. 461, line 7, _for_ Coat, _read_ Cock.




INDEX


  Abbat, derivation of, ii. 61
  ―――― of St. German’s, ii. 59
  Abbe Tone, or abbey town, ii. 59
  Abbitown, now St. German’s, i. 32
  Abbot, Mr. i. 125
  Abbytone, ii. 62
  Abchurch, St. Mary, rectory, London, i. 72
  Aberdeen, i. 247
  Abergavenny, Lord, i. 87
  Abernethy, now St. Andrew’s, iv. 105
  Abingdon abbey, i. 342
  Abraham, i. 414
  Acacia armata, iv. 181
  ―――― dealbata, iv. 183
  ―――― lopantha, iv. 183
  Achaia in Greece, iv. 161
  Achelous, the river god, ii. 161
  Achym, William, monument to, iii. 292.――Thomas, family arms, and
    etymology of the name, iv. 23
  Acland, Sir John, iii. 271. Sir Thomas, 42, 274. Sir T. D. 271.――Of
    Killerton, iv. 16. Colonel, 185.――Family, ii. 416
  Acre, comparison of the Cornish, Saxon, and Norman, iii. 388
  Acres, the number of in Cornwall, Appendix I. iv. 177
  Act of Parliament for improving Truro, iv. 80
  Acton castle, iii. 311
  Acton of Acton Scot, i. 400
  Addis, i. 417.――John and William, iii. 38
  Adelredus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Adelstowe, iii. 277, 278 _bis_
  Adis of Plymouth, i. 420
  Adlington, John, iv. 77
  Admiralty, Nicholas Trevanion, commissioner of the, iv. 116
  Adobed, Reginald, i. 134
  Adour, river, iv. 159
  Adredus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Adrian, Emperor, i. 393――iv. 117
  Adrian, Pope, ii. 212
  Adriatic sea, iv. 172
  Adulphus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Advent, alias St. Anne parish, i. 62, 129, 132――ii. 401 _bis_,
    408――iii. 222
  ADVENT parish, by Hals, situation, ancient state, boundaries,
    etymology of name, saint, church patron, land tax, i. 1. By
    Tonkin, name, Trethym. By Whitaker, etymology, saint’s history 2.
    By Lysons, villages, manor of Trelagoe. By the Editor, statistics.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 3
  Adwen, St. history of, i. 2
  Æschylus, iii. 34
  Africa, iii. 187 _bis_
  Agapanthus umbellatus, iv. 181
  Agar, Mrs. i. 384.――Hon. C. B. ii. 381. Mr. 57. Mrs. 197, 258,
    348.――Mr. iv. 44
  Agincourt, battle of, iii. 316
  Agnes, St. iii. 312, 313
  ―――― St. church, iii. 176
  ―――― St. island, ii. 358――iv. 173, 174. By Leland, Appendix, 266.
    Its extent 175.――Lighthouse upon, ii. 358――iv. 175. Its latitude
    and longitude, and time of high water 175
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 234, 235, 317, 402――iii. 380
  AGNES, St. parish, by Hals, situation, ancient state, land tax,
    church, i. 4. Saint’s history 5. Feast, Carne Buryanacht, St.
    Agnes ball 6. Manors and seats, Mithian 7. Trevellis, Trevawnance
    8. By Tonkin, etymology of Pider, Kyvere Ankou, Trevannence; the
    same from Lysons, Breanis, description and productions 10. By
    Lysons, harbour at Trevannence Porth 11. Market, Porth Chapel,
    Chapel at Mola, almshouses and schools 12. By the Editor, remarks
    on the Tonkin family, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 13. The
    beacon 14
  Agnes’ St. ball or plague, i. 6
  ―――― St. beacon, i. 10. Geology 14. Position and height 15
  ―――― St. well, i. 12
  Agonal, iii. 434
  Agricola, Tacitus’s Life of, iii. 162
  Agricolaus, i. 52
  Ahab, King, i. 329
  Aikin, Miss, ii. 77
  Ailmer, Earl of Cornwall, i. 73――iii. 462
  Ainton, Thomas de, iii. 354
  Aire, a farm of Mr. Stephens’s where he and his family shut
    themselves up from the plague and escaped, ii. 271
  Alan River, i. 74, 94, 115, 153, 367, 371, 372 _ter._, 373, 375――ii.
    402 _ter._――iii. 277, 334
  Albalanda family, ii. 300, 302, 303 _bis_, 305――iii. 213
  Alban, St. the Briton, ii. 64, 75. His Shrine 74
  Alban’s, St. town, why named, general council of British clergy at,
    St. German preached at, ii. 64. St. German’s chapel at 65
  ―――― St. battle of, ii. 260――iii. 234
  Albemarle, Duke of, ii. 27, 28, 94. His letter of thanks to Capt.
    Penrose 28
  Albigenses, i. 311
  Albiniaco, Philip de, ii. 428
  Alderscombe, account of, ii. 347, 351
  Aldestowe, iii. 278 _bis_
  Aldwinick, ii. 77
  Aldwyn, Bishop of Lindisfarne, i. 290 _bis_
  Alein, by Leland, iv. 262
  Alexander, John, ii. 160
  ―――― the Third, Pope, iii. 115
  Alexandria, ii. 81――iii. 187 _bis_.――St. Catharine born at, ii. 37
  Alfred, King, i. 290 _ter._――ii. 155――iii. 74, 241, 262. The Great,
    visited St. Neot, who appeared to him after death 262. Founded
    Oxford by his advice 263
  Alfridus or Alfricus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Alfwaldus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Algar, Earl of Cornwall, i. 73 _bis_, 74, 94 _bis_, 95――iii. 462
  Algarus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Algerine pirates stranded in Mount’s Bay, iii. 97
  Algiers, governor of, ii. 100
  Alien priories, their origin, iv. 99. Suppression 101
  All Saints’ day, ii. 150, 287
  All Souls’ college, Oxford, ii. 147, 227, 228――iii. 123, 155, 252, 344
  Allan family, ii. 286
  Allan, St. name explained, iv. 313
  Allanson, Rev. George, of St. Tudy, iv. 95
  Allen, Ralph, history of, i. 56
  ―――― Mr. of Bath, ii. 33. Thomas 233
  ―――― St. iv. 24, 75
  ―――― St. parish, i. 202, 393, 404, 417――ii. 315, 318――iii. 267, 313.
    Living of 300
  ALLEN, St. parish, by Hals, situation, ancient state, i. 15.
    Endowment, first fruits, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land
    tax, Gwarnike 16. Etymology 17. Treonike, tale of a stolen child,
    families originating from church offices, Tretheris chapel 18. By
    Tonkin, Gwairnick, Boswellick, Nancarrow 19. Gwerick, Trerice,
    Trefronick, Talcarne. By Lysons, Villages of Lane and Zela 20. By
    the Editor, name and feast, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 21
  Allett, i. 415
  Allin, John, iv. 18
  Allington, South, manor, iii. 436
  Allworthy, Fielding’s, i. 57
  Almes Pool Meadow, ii. 41
  Alonzo, King of Castille, i. 311
  Aloysoa citra odora, iv. 181
  Alps, iii. 121, 186.――Miniature model of, ii. 150
  Alpsius, Duke of Devon and Cornwall, ii. 420
  Alric, Earl, stole the body of St. Neot, iii. 263
  Als, John de, i. 144
  Als manor in Buryan, ii. 118
  Alse, i. 144. De Alse of Lelant ibid.
  Alsius, Duke of Devonshire and Cornwall, iii. 415
  Altar cloth, curious, i. 157
  Altarnun parish, i. 62, 129, 159, 167, 174, 196, 197, 201, 257, 304,
    308, 317――ii. 36――iv. 48, 68, 69, 70 Altarnunæ, Alternun, iii. 36,
    39, 260, 335.――Alternunn, ii. 229, 377
  ALTARNUN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, i. 21. Ancient
    state, first fruits, patron, incumbent, land tax, etymology,
    nunnery 22. Trelawny, Peter Jowle 23. Instances of longevity 24.
    By Tonkin, etymology. By the Editor, St. Nun, St. Nun’s well 24.
    St. Nun’s day, extent, villages, fairs, church-tower, statistics.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 25. Stone quarry, Endsleigh cottage 26
  Alured, Col. iv. 186
  Alvacot village, iv. 41
  Alverton manor, ii. 282――iii. 78, 90, 91, 92, 426. Account of 79,
    90.――Lord of, ii. 130
  Alvorton, iv. 164
  Alwalfus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Alwolfus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Amadis, John, of Plymouth, i. 348
  Amall manor, iv. 52
  Amalphy in Naples, St. Andrew’s body at, iv. 101
  Amaneth, ii. 203, 211
  Amator, St. Bishop of Auxerre, ii. 73 _bis_
  Ambrose, St. ii. 279
  ―――― Well, i. 247
  Ambrosius, Aurelius, i. 326
  Amellibrea belongs to the Editor, ancient buildings there, iv. 54
  America, iii. 183.――Packets for, receive their despatches at
    Falmouth, ii. 11. Separated from England 245. War with 245,
    267.――No heaths in, iii. 173
  ―――― South, i. 164――iii. 205
  Ammonian harmony, iii. 408
  Amorites, Kings of, ii. 285
  “Amorous Fantasme, a Tragi-Comedy,” iv. 98
  Amural, ii. 367
  Amy, Cotton, of Botreaux Castle, Anne, Grace, and Mr. i.
    134.――Edward and Rev. James, ii. 49.――Cotton, iii. 235, 236.
    Edward 232. Grace 235, 236. Rev. James 232, 235, 236. Mr.
    235.――Family, iv. 62
  Amye, sister of King Arthur, i. 332
  Amyll manor, iv. 55
  Amys, of Botreaux castle, the coheir of, iv. 45
  Anabaptists, iv. 73
  Andegavia, now Angiers, i. 335 _ter._
  Andrew, Anne, and John, ii. 253.――Richard, iii. 387
  ―――― of Trevellance, Jane or Anne, John, iii. 326, 333
  ―――― Thomas, ii. 189――iii. 387.――Mr. ii. 354
  Andrew, St. the Apostle, his history, iv. 100. Occasion of his
    adoption as patron of Scotland 105
  ―――― St. church in Stratton, ii. 427
  ―――― St. church, Holborn, ii. 267
  ―――― St. monastery, university, and city, iv. 105
  ―――― St. priory, i. 167
  Andromache, iii. 420
  Anecdotes of Heraldry by a Lady, iii. 137
  Angarder chapel, iii. 314
  Angarrack, iii. 343
  Ange, Rev. Mr. ii. 24
  Angelo, St., Marq. of, in Spain, descended from the Tregians, iii. 381
  Angiers in France, iv. 100, 144
  Anglesey, i. 295 _bis_
  Angove, iv. 128
  ―――― family, ii. 236, 241 _bis_. Abel 241. Reginald 236, 240.
    Etymology 236.――Richard, iii. 387
  Anhele Nunnery, Truro, ii. 315
  An Marogeth Arvowed, account of, iii. 430
  Anhell, iv. 73
  Anjou, Angiers the capital of, iv. 105
  “Annals, Firbisse’s,” iv. 146
  Anne, Princess, called Anne Eat-all, said to have died from
    overeating, ii. 15
  ―――― Queen, ii. 98――iii. 62 _bis_, 145, 176, 201, 249, 297
    _ter._――iv. 21 _bis_, 23, 116.――The Pitt diamond offered to, i.
    68.――Her last Parliament, ii. 98, 287, 348
  ――――’s, Queen, bounty, ii. 93
  ―――― St. i. 157
  ―――― St. parish, _see Advent_
  Annual celebrations natural, ii. 288
  Annunciation, i. 157
  Ansbury, diocese of, ii. 81
  Anson, Commodore, iii. 205
  Anthology of Greek Epigrams, iv. 87
  Anthony family, ii. 275
  Anthony parish, ii. 250――iii. 436
  ―――― East manor, i. 33――ii. 252 _ter._――Description of, i. 37
  ―――― East parish, ii. 252――iii. 101
  ―――― St. iii. 113. The patron of fishermen 91
  ―――― St. of Egypt, history of, i. 28, 29. Festival 31
  ―――― St. of Padua, history of, i. 29. Festival 31
  ―――― manor, iii. 209
  ―――― parish, ii. 1, 2, 17, 50 _bis_, 319――iii. 110 _bis_, 128, 380, 456
  ANTHONY ST., in Kerrier parish, feast, i. 31. Boundaries, situation,
    ancient state, first fruits, incumbent 32. Land tax, East Anthony,
    and family of Carew 33. Intsworth 36. By Tonkin, East Anthony. By
    Editor, Rt. Hon. Reginald Pole Carew, statistics 37. Church
    monuments, population, incumbent, Geology 38
  ―――― in Kerrier Parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of
    benefice, patron, i. 38. Incumbent, land tax, Saint, Trewothike,
    Roscruge, Denis and Great Denis 39. By Tonkin, Little Dinas, the
    last place that held out for Charles 1st. By Editor, statistics,
    antiquities, Geology 40
  ―――― in Powder parish, ii. 275, 281――iii. 395. Rocks similar to
    those in Gerans, ii. 58
  ―――― in Powder parish, situation, boundaries, i. 26. Ancient state,
    history, Rules of Canons Augustine 27. First fruits, patron, land
    tax, saint’s history and name, Plase, St. Anthony Point 28. By
    Tonkin, Boswartha, Porth. By the Editor, history of St. Anthony of
    Egypt, and of St. Anthony of Padua 29. Legend of the latter, by
    Dr. Darwin 30. Feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 31
  ―――― Point, i. 28
  ―――― Prior of, ii. 51 _bis_. Priory 277
  Anthyllis hermannia, iv. 181
  Anticiodorum, St. German, Bishop of, ii. 59
  Antiocheis, i. 342
  Antiochesis, i. 325
  Antiquarian Society, communication of Mr. Arundell upon Theodore
    Paleologus to, ii. 365
  “Antiquities of Cornwall,” ii. 338――iv. 30
  Antirrhinum monspessulanum, iii. 63
  Antis, John, i. 319
  Antonies, St. by Leland, iv. 270, 289
  Antron, account of, iii. 445
  ―――― of Antron, family, iii. 445
  Antwerp, iii. 67. Nuns from, received at Lanhearne 150
  Antyer Deweth, iii. 431
  Anvilla, Robert de Edune, iv. 77, 82
  Anwena, Bishop of Dorchester, iv. 137
  Apeley, i. 223
  Apennines, ii. 213
  Apollo, i. 295
  Apparition, treasure discovered by, i. 162
  Aquitaine, i. 335――iv. 145
  Arabia, iii. 187
  Arcedekne, Thomas de, i. 340.――Alice, John and Thomas, Lords, of
    Warine Family, iii. 405
  Archæologia, iii. 244
  Archdeacon of East Anthony, Thomas, Walter, and arms, i. 33. And of
    Haccomb, Philippa, and Sir Warren 33, 64, 262
  Arche, Sir Richard, i. 168
  Archedecon family, iii. 44. Thomas, Lord de 405
  Archer of Trelaske, N. S. ii. 243――iii. 38 _bis_. Mr. and his
    brother 338. Family and their monuments 37
  ―――― of Trelowick, John, i. 417. John 420. Rev. Mr. 417. William,
    arms 420
  Arcturus, i. 342
  Ardent, a 64 gun ship taken by the French and Spanish combined
    fleets in Plymouth Sound, ii. 246
  Ardeverauian, by Leland, iv. 266
  Ardevermeur, by Leland, iv. 273
  Ardevon parish, ii. 208
  Ardfert, diocese of, iii. 434
  Argand lamps in the Lizard Lighthouses, ii. 359
  Arian clergy, i. 338
  ―――― heresy, iii. 59
  Arianism, i. 115, 252――iii. 64. St. Dye opposed to, ii. 131
  Arians, i. 294――ii. 63. St. Hilary, a violent opponent of 168, 169.
    Furious hostility of St. Ambrose against 279.――St. Martin opposed
    them, iii. 122
  Aristolochia sempervirens, iv. 181
  Aristophanes, ii. 265
  Aristotle, ii. 408
  Arius, i. 305.――His heresy, ii. 63
  Armagh, St., Malachy Archbishop of, ii. 225
  Armes in Castle Cairden, iv. 262
  Armorica, i. 115――iii. 336 _bis_.――Or Little Britain, iv. 157
  Armorican tongue, iii. 114
  Arms of Achym, iv. 23
  ―――― Albalonda, ii. 303
  ―――― Arcedekne, i. 33――iii. 405
  ―――― Archer, i. 420
  ―――― Arthur, King, i. 336
  ―――― Arundell, i. 162, 405――iii. 142, 149, 270 _bis_――iv.
    72.――Crest, i. 405
  ―――― Baldwin, iii. 66
  ―――― Barret, ii. 89
  ―――― Basset, ii. 239
  ―――― Bastard, i. 320
  ―――― Beare, i. 405――iv. 22
  ―――― Beauchamp, ii. 130 _bis_
  ―――― Beel, ii. 252
  ―――― Bellot, i. 302
  ―――― Bennet, iii. 3
  ―――― Berkeley, ii. 11――iv. 14
  ―――― Betenson, iii. 23
  ―――― Bevill, i. 17――iv. 22, 72
  ―――― Bickton, i. 412
  ―――― Billing, iv. 95
  ―――― Blewet, i. 210 _bis_――iv. 95
  ―――― Bochym, ii. 131, 302
  ―――― Bodrigan, ii. 107 _bis_――iii. 119
  ―――― Boggan, ii. 320
  ―――― Bone, ii. 353
  ―――― Bonithon, i. 302――iii. 226
  ―――― Borlase, i. 18――iii. 84
  ―――― Boscawen, i. 140
  ―――― Bosistow, iii. 35
  ―――― Bowden, ii. 303
  ―――― Bray, ii. 311
  ―――― Budeoxhed, i. 348
  ―――― Buller, iii. 249
  ―――― Caddock, Earl of Cornw., i. 203
  ―――― Call, i. 162
  ―――― Camelford borough, ii. 404
  ―――― Carlyon, i. 54
  ―――― Carmenow, iii. 129――iv. 72
  ―――― Carne, i. 10
  ―――― Carnsew, ii. 337
  ―――― Carrow, i. 35
  ―――― Carter, i. 223
  ―――― Carverth, ii. 94, 337
  ―――― Cavall, ii. 335 _bis_
  ―――― Chamond, ii. 414
  ―――― Champernown, ii. 254 _quat._
  ―――― Cheyney, iv. 43
  ―――― Chynoweth, i. 292
  ―――― Coke, i. 395, 396
  ―――― Coplestone, ii. 293
  ―――― Coren, iii. 3
  ―――― Coryton, iii. 162
  ―――― Coswarth, i. 211
  ―――― Cottell, ii. 352
  ―――― Courtenay, iv. 96
  ―――― Crane, iii. 387
  ―――― Damerell, iii. 61
  ―――― D’Angers, iii. 226
  ―――― Davies, i. 361
  ―――― Davis, i. 144
  ―――― Dawnay, iii. 437, 438
  ―――― Dinham, i. 170
  ―――― Dodson, i. 412
  ―――― Dundagell borough, i. 323
  ―――― Edgecumbe, iii. 103――iv. 72
  ―――― Egleshayle, i. 374
  ―――― Erisey, ii. 116――iii. 419
  ―――― Ferrers, iii. 134
  ―――― Fitzroy, ii. 11
  ―――― Fitz-William, ii. 410
  ―――― Flammock, i. 85
  ―――― Fowey town, ii. 38
  ―――― German’s, St. priory, ii. 63
  ―――― Glynn, i. 172――ii. 142
  ―――― Godolphin, i. 124――ii. 335
  ―――― Grosse, iii. 249
  ―――― Hare, i. 406
  ―――― Harris, ii. 122
  ―――― Hawes, ii. 300, 316
  ―――― Hawkins, i. 45
  ―――― Heale, i. 107
  ―――― Heart, ii. 152
  ―――― Hele, iv. 152
  ―――― Helston borough, ii. 156
  ―――― Hemley, i. 384
  ―――― Hext, i. 44
  ―――― Hill, ii. 136――iii. 191
  ―――― Hobbs, ii. 54
  ―――― Hoblyn, i. 223
  ―――― Hooker, iii. 203
  ―――― Howeis, ii. 304
  ―――― Ives, St. borough, ii. 258
  ―――― Ives, St. town, ii. 271
  ―――― Keate, i. 224
  ―――― Kekewich, i. 372――ii. 410
  ―――― Kelliow, ii. 399
  ―――― Kellyow, i. 320
  ―――― Kemell, i. 265
  ―――― Kempe, ii. 54
  ―――― Kendall, i. 319
  ―――― Kestell, iii. 112, 113
  ―――― Killigrew, ii. 7
  ―――― Killiton borough, ii. 310
  ―――― King, i. 204
  ―――― King John, iv. 71
  ―――― Lambron, iii. 316
  ―――― Lamellin, ii. 411
  ―――― Lanyon, ii. 142, 143
  ―――― Laughairne, ii. 316
  ―――― Leveale, i. 143
  ―――― Ley, i. 396
  ―――― Littleton, iii. 227
  ―――― Long, i. 378
  ―――― Looe, West, borough, iv. 21
  ―――― Manaton, ii. 231
  ―――― Marney, iii. 65
  ―――― Matthew, ii. 337
  ―――― Mawe’s, St. borough, ii. 276
  ―――― Mawgan, iii. 148
  ―――― Megara bishopric, i. 75, 94
  ―――― Milliton, i. 125
  ―――― Mohun, i. 351――iv. 96
  ―――― Molesworth, i. 370
  ―――― Morton, iv. 3
  ―――― Moyle, ii. 67
  ―――― Murth, iv. 25
  ―――― Mydhop, i. 320
  ―――― Nance, ii. 239――iv. 129
  ―――― Nanfan, i. 408
  ―――― Nanskevall, or Typpet, iv. 139
  ―――― Nansperian, i. 349
  ―――― Neville, cognizance, ii. 38
  ―――― Nicholls, ii. 339
  ―――― Noye, iii. 145, 151 _bis_
  ―――― Opie, i. 399
  ―――― Oxford, i. 58.――City, ii. 404
  ―――― Paleolagus, ii. 365
  ―――― Parker, i. 136――ii. 12 _bis_
  ―――― Parkings, iv. 140
  ―――― Payne, ii. 198
  ―――― Paynter, i. 349, 350
  ―――― Pendarves, i. 161――ii. 93, 98
  ―――― Pendre, i. 143
  ―――― Penkivell, i. 297
  ―――― Penrose, iii. 443
  ―――― Penwarne, iii. 75, 77
  ―――― Peter, iii. 176
  ―――― Peverell, i. 368
  ―――― Polkinghorne, ii. 142
  ―――― Polwhele, i. 205
  ―――― Pomeroy, i. 297
  ―――― Porter, iii. 66
  ―――― Prideaux, ii. 242――iii. 56, 279
  ―――― Prout, iii. 66
  ―――― Pye, iii. 449
  ―――― Quarme, i. 256, 422
  ―――― Rame, iii. 374
  ―――― Randyll, i. 421――ii. 353
  ―――― Rashleigh, i. 43
  ―――― Ravenscroft, i. 374
  ―――― Renaudin, iii. 303
  ―――― Reskymer, iii. 133――iv. 96
  ―――― Richard, King of the Romans, ii. 8――iii. 169
  ―――― Robarts, Earl of Radnor, ii. 380
  ―――― Robins, iv. 117
  ―――― Robinson, iii. 422
  ―――― Rogers, iii. 76
  ―――― Romans, _see Richard_
  ―――― Roscrow, ii. 337
  ―――― Rosogan, i. 400
  ―――― Rous, i. 313
  ―――― Sandys, iii. 158 _bis_
  ―――― Sargeaux, ii. 395
  ―――― Scawen, ii. 68
  ―――― Scobell, i. 44
  ―――― Scobhall, i. 44
  ―――― Scrope, iii. 129, 130
  ―――― Searle, i. 37
  ―――― Seccombe, i. 417
  ―――― Serischall, iii. 225
  ―――― Seriseaux, iii. 225
  ―――― Seyntaubyn, i. 262
  ―――― Silly, iii. 237
  ―――― Slanning, iii. 76
  ―――― Smith, i. 250
  ―――― Speccott, i. 379
  ―――― Spour, ii. 227
  ―――― Sprye, i. 28
  ―――― Tencreek, i. 255
  ―――― Thomas, ii. 337――iii. 326
  ―――― Thoms, iii. 125
  ―――― Tonkin, i. 9, 13――iii. 315
  ―――― Treago, i. 249
  ―――― Treby, i. 412
  ―――― Trecarrell, iii. 438
  ―――― Tredenham, iii. 361 _bis_
  ―――― Tredinick, i. 116――iv. 95
  ―――― Treffreye, ii. 43
  ―――― Trefusis, iii. 318, 227
  ―――― Tregagle, iii. 265
  ―――― Tregarthyn, ii. 110
  ―――― Tregeare, i. 263, 264
  ―――― Tregian, iii. 357
  ―――― Tregonell, i. 247
  ―――― Tregony borough, i. 296
  ―――― Tregoze, i. 39
  ―――― Trehaire, iii. 355
  ―――― Trehawke, iii. 169
  ―――― Trelawder, iv. 95
  ―――― Trelawney, i. 23――iii. 169, 295――iv. 96
  ―――― Trembleth, iii. 405
  ―――― Tremere, ii. 385
  ―――― Trenance, iv. 161
  ―――― Trencreek, i. 256
  ―――― Trengove, iv. 129
  ―――― Trenowith, ii. 107
  ―――― Trenowth, iv. 72
  ―――― Trenwith, ii. 259
  ―――― Trethurfe, ii. 353
  ―――― Trevanion, iii. 200
  ―――― Trevillian, i. 198
  ―――― Trevisa, i. 314
  ―――― Trewhythenick, i. 207
  ―――― Trewinard, i. 136, 346
  ―――― Trewolla, ii. 110
  ―――― Trewoofe, i. 142
  ―――― Trewoolla, i. 206
  ―――― Treworthen, iii. 269
  ―――― Trewren, i. 237
  ―――― Tripcony, ii. 124
  ―――― Typpet, iv. 139
  ―――― Uter Pendragon, i. 326
  ―――― Vaughan, i. 39
  ―――― Vere, ii. 185
  ―――― Vincent, i. 205――ii. 227 _bis_
  ―――― Vivian, i. 76, 94, 222
  ―――― Vyvyan, iii. 135
  ―――― Walesborough, iii. 116
  ―――― Wayte, i. 244
  ―――― Webber, ii. 336
  ―――― William, i. 53, 396
  ―――― Williams, iii. 145 _bis_, 355 _bis_, 356
  ―――― Winter, ii. 304
  ―――― Woolridge, i. 256
  ―――― Worth, iii. 60
  ―――― Wrey, i. 411
  ―――― Yeo, ii. 87
  Army, argument upon, ii. 76
  Arrish Mow, ii. 57
  Arscott, Denis, iv. 157. Tristram 41. Mrs. 157. Family 127, 157
  ―――― of Devon, ii. 336
  ―――― Mevagissey, Rev. John, iii. 195
  ―――― Tetcot, i. 370, 375
  Arsenic, process of extracting, iii. 305
  Arthur, Francis, i. 282
  ―――― King, i. 305, 323, 339 _ter._, 341, 372, 404――ii. 50, 214, 259,
    308, 403 _bis_.――His parentage, i. 326, 331. Birth 332. History
    333. Death 337. His arms 336. Lines upon him 325. Merlin’s
    prophecy of him 333. His tomb, and finding of his body 337. Lord
    Bacon’s opinion of him 340.――The British Hector, slain near
    Camelford, in battle against Mordred, verses upon, ii. 402. Born
    on the same shore. Stone bearing his name 403――The spot where he
    received his death wound marked by a stone, iii. 236
  ―――― King, acts of, iii. 163
  ―――― Prince, Romance of, i. 342
  ―――― Duke of Brittany, heir of Richard’s crown, ii. 178
  ――――’s admirals, i. 338
  ―――― castle, i. 343
  ―――― round table, i. 338
  ―――― stone, account of, i. 220
  ―――― table and tressels of gold, i. 338
  Artificial reef, iii. 379
  Artire river, iii. 457
  Artocarpus, or breadfruit tree, iv. 45
  Arun river, iii. 206
  Arundell, or Arundale in Sussex, iii. 206
  ―――― i. 113, 121, 125, 167, 198, 210, 213, 298, 317 _quat._, 318,
    319, 386, 392, 420, 421 _bis_. Humphrey 301. John de 405. Sir John
    213. Sir John 218. Margery 38. Renphry 125, 418. Sir Renphry
    213.――Family, ii. 128, 354, 415. Their property in Cornwall, sale
    of 147. Rev. F. V. J. 140, 365. Rector of Landulph 387. General
    192, 193, 196, 197. Geffery 195. Humphrey, Governor of St.
    Michael’s Mount 198. Humphrey the rebel 326. Jane 124. John 9.
    Lord, sale of his property 128. Richard Lord, governor of
    Pendennis castle 14. William 123. Mr. 123, 124.――Sir John, iii.
    332, 396. Richard 267. Thomas 141. Lord 343, 344. Miss 80, 369.
    Mr. 201. Family 83, 85, 137, 240, 269, 333, 343, 445. Arms 142.
    Monuments to 151. Origin of name 142, 150. Property 353.――Sir
    John, iv. 153. Lord 106. Miss 116. A younger branch of the family
    16. Arms 72
  ―――― of Caryhayes, heir of, iii. 202
  ―――― Clifton family, ii. 372. Lived at Clifton ibid. Alexander, Sir
    John, Mary 375. Thomas, Sir Thomas 371, 373. William 375
  ―――― St. Colomb Major, Elizabeth, iii. 318 _bis_. Thomas ibid.
  ―――― Gloucestershire, iii. 142
  ―――― Lanherne, i. 218, 223, 405 _ter._ Edmond 121 _bis_. John,
    Bishop of Exeter 218. Sir John 415. Sir John or Renfry 120. Lord
    170. Renfry 218. Crest 405.――Humphrey, ii. 191, 192. Sir John 145,
    146 _ter._ Family 127, 147, 148, 149.――Sir Edmund, iii. 316.
    Edward 318. Elizabeth 140, 316 _bis_, 317. John 140 _quater_. Sir
    John, _bis_. Sir John, Sheriff 141. John, Bishop of Litchfield and
    Coventry, memoir of, ib. Sir John, the last possessor 142, 150.
    Sir John 143 _bis_, 148, 196, 201, 316 _bis_, 339. John de 269.
    Ralph 268, 269 _bis_. Renfry and Renfry 141. Sir Renfry 316 _bis_.
    Renfry 316. Richard B. 141. Miss 141. Mr. 140, 357. Family 104,
    140, 145, 268, 274, 391. Character of 150. Arms 149, 270. Lines on
    149. Name 142. Called “The Great Arundells” 140, 149,
    150.――Family, iv. 3, 103, 106, 161
  ―――― Lanheme and Wardour family, iv. 154
  ―――― Menadarva, i. 161, _ter._ John ib. Arms 162.――Family, iii. 85
  ―――― Sythney, i. 65
  ―――― Talverne, i. 222. John 65. Sir John 123. Sir Thomas 346,
    356.――Tolverne Grace, iii. 183. Sir John ib. 325 _ter._ Family
    104, 142, 149――ii. 256, 257, 276 _bis_, 279, 280, 336. Sir John,
    obtained a pardon for Lady Killigrew 6. Sir Thomas 170
  ―――― Tregarthin and Caryhayes, iv. 116
  ―――― Trembleth, i. 213, 405.――Mr. ii. 146.――In St. Ervan, Sir R.
    iii. 149. Family 140
  ―――― Tremodart in Duloe, Thomas, iv. 34 _ter._ Family 34 _bis_
  ―――― Trerice, i. 17, 19, 20 _bis_, 210, 211, 319. John 161. Sir John
    415. Lord 415.――John, father of Richard, called John of Tilbury,
    governor of Pendennis castle, besieged there by parliament forces,
    ii. 13. Sir John 185. Sent to reduce the Earl of Oxford at St.
    Michael’s Mount 183. Stormed it, killed, and his troops repulsed,
    his fortune told 184. Richard, his marriage 13.――Anne, iii. 199,
    201. John 199, 201, 269. Sir John 213. Sir John, story of 274. Sir
    John, called “The Tilbury” and “John for the King” 270, 274. John
    Lord 267, 325. Monument to Margaret his wife 271. Ralph 270. Sir
    Richard first Lord, and his grandson 274. Miss 141. Family 104.
    Arms and vault 270.――Family, iv. 13, 16
  ―――― Trethall, John and Prudence, ii. 320
  ―――― Trevethick family, iii. 142, 149.――Or Trevithick, Thomas, i.
    223 _bis_. Family 223
  ―――― Wardour, Lords, iii. 142, 149, 150 _bis_. Lord 352 _bis_. Henry
    8th Lord, sold his Cornish property 151
  Arundell castle, iii. 142 _bis_.
  ―――― Ederick, Saxon Earl of, iii. 142
  ―――― town, iii. 142 _bis_.
  Arundo aremaria, iii. 6
  Arwennak, by Leland, iv. 270
  Arwinick, i. 398――iii. 75.――Manor, etymology, ii. 4, 17.
    Inhabitants, house built by Sir John Killigrew 5. Present
    possessor 6
  Arwinike, i. 136, 137
  Arworthal manor, account of, iii. 302
  Asa, William, ii. 192
  Asan, brother-in-law of Thomas Paleolagus, ii. 367
  Asaph, St. Jeffery of Monmouth, Bishop of, i. 342
  Asche, by Leland, iv. 281
  Ashburnham, Lord, iv. 14
  Ashmolean museum, i. 300――iii. 50, 52
  Asia, the Lesser, iv. 172
  ―――― Minor, the castles of, ii. 423
  Asparagus officinalis, iii. 260
  Asperville, Oliver de, iv. 28
  Asshe, by Leland, iv. 291
  Assium, or Assissum, i. 80, 81, 174
  Aster argophyllus, iv. 181
  Astle, Thomas, ancient MS. in his library, iv. 190
  Astley, ii. 186
  Astronomer royal, ii. 222, 223
  Atery, ii. 418
  Athanasian Creed, i. 252
  Athelstan, Bishop of Cornwall, his see, iii. 415. His successors
    ibid.
  ―――― the 2nd Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  ―――― King, i. 139, 240――ii. 59, 60, 61, 69, 158――iii. 277, 278
    _bis_, 322 _bis_, 430, 433, 462――iv. 40. Separated Devon from
    Cornwall 104
  Athenodorus, St. History of, i. 386, 388
  Atlantic Ocean, i. 388――ii. 283――iii. 98, 426, 429, 430
  Attall Saracen, i. 414
  Attica, iv. 161
  Atticus, a Greek geographer, ii. 172
  Attornies, Cornish, ii. 253
  Atwell, Rev. Hugh, i. 421.――John, ii. 189
  Auburne, Nicholas, ii. 189
  Aubyn, St., family, i. 32, 93――iv. 54, _see Seynt Aubyn_
  Audley, James Touchet, Lord, i. 86, beheaded 87
  Augmentation office, ii. 412, 425――iii. 286, 293――iv. 113.――Copy
    from, ii. 429. Roll preserved in 87
  Augo, William de, Archdeacon of Cornwall, ii. 426
  Augustine, i. 410
  ―――― St. i. 312.――Relates miracles of St. Hilary, ii. 169
  ―――― black monks of, iii. 111
  ―――― bull, iv. 100
  ―――― canons, i. 27, 73 _bis_――iii. 456. College of in St. Colomb
    141. Priory of 458
  ―――― friars, i. 83
  Augustinum, iv. 117, or Autun 121
  Augustus, Emperor, i. 386
  ―――― title of, assumed by the Emperor Charles VIII. 369
  Auld Lang Syne, iii. 298
  Aulerci, several places in Gallia so called, iv. 116
  ―――― Branovices, ib.
  ―――― Cenomanni, now Mans, ib.
  ―――― Diablentres, ib.
  ―――― Eburorices, in Normandy, ib.
  Auncell, Richard, ii. 209
  Aurelian, Emperor, i. 214 _bis_, 236, 388
  Aurivale, ii. 428
  Austell, William de, and his arms, i. 42
  ―――― St. parish, i. 52 _bis_, 59, 106, 128, 152, 416, 418, 423――ii.
    314――iii. 47, 55, 58 _bis_, 198, 253, 391, 394, 395, 450, 455――iv.
    54, 104, 110
  AUSTELL, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    etymology, history of church, patronage, incumbent, i. 41.
    Impropriation, value of Benefice, land tax, divisions, Treverbyn
    42. Penrice, Menagwins 43. Roseundle, Roscorla, Trenaran, Merther,
    story of Mr. Laa 44. Hawkins family, Towington, Upcott family 45.
    By Norden, Polruddon. By Tonkin, Tewington 46. Pentwan, Pelniddon,
    Trenorren. By the Editor, rise owing to mines and china clay 47.
    Villages, church and tower, font, almshouse 48. Antiquities,
    statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 49. Elvan courses,
    streamworks 50
  Austell, St. river, i. 47
  ―――― town, i. 41, 45, 48――ii. 47――iii. 121, 190, 195, 196.――Market
    and fairs, i. 42. Formerly a village, great road through, export,
    harbour at Seaporth 47. Railroad finished 1832, 48.――Road to Fowey
    from, iv. 109
  Austelles, St. by Leland, iv. 274
  Austen, J. T. representative of the Treffrye family, a spirited and
    judicious miner, ii. 46
  ―――― place in Fowey, J. T. iii. 348 _bis_.
  Austin canons, cell of in Lancell’s parish, ii. 415 _bis_.
  ―――― St. iii. 167, 284, 285.――Bishop of Rochester, ii. 279, 287, 288
    _bis_.
  ―――― Abbey, Canterbury, iii. 114, 115
  Austol’s, St. by Leland, iv. 289
  Austria, Leopold Archduke of, made Richard 1st prisoner, ii. 178
  Auvergne, ii. 86
  Auxerre, diocese of, ii. 75
  ―――― St. Amator, Bishop of, ii. 73 _bis_.
  ―――― St. German, Bishop of, ii. 63, 64
  ―――― oratory of St. Morice at, ii. 75
  Auxona, R. ii. 64
  Avalde, i. 407
  Avallon, i. 337 _bis_.
  Avant, i. 223
  Ave, etymology, i. 182
  Ave-Mary lane, ib.
  Avery family, i. 204 _bis_, 224.――Captain, a celebrated buccaneer,
    supposed to have buried treasure, ii. 128.――Mr. iii. 235
    _bis_.――William, iv. 77
  Avoh beacon, iii. 394, 401
  Avon river, in Somersetshire, ii. 292, 293
  Avranches, Augustine, Bishop of, ii. 208
  Axceolanum, or Hexham, the see of, iv. 42
  Axminster, i. 328
  ―――― hundred, iv. 15
  Aylesbury, i. 258
  Ayleworth, Captain, iii. 183
  Ayre, St. iii. 55
  Ayscough, Sir George, his engagement with the Dutch, ii. 25.
    Entertained at Le Feock by Captain Penrose 26. Sailed to the Sound 27
  Ayscough’s Catalogue, iii. 154
  Ayssheby, ii. 430

  Babb of Tingraze, Devon, iv. 95
  Babylon, iii. 434
  Babylonish captivity, iii. 69
  Bacchus and Sergius, Saints, Abbey at Angiers, iv. 99, 105. Their
    history 100
  Bacon, Lord Chancellor, i. 340. His History of Henry VII. 87
  ―――― Sir Nicholas, Lord Chancellor, married a daughter of Sir
    Anthony Cooke, ii. 16
  Badcock, Henry, iii. 86 _bis_. Rev. Henry 117. Margery and Mrs. 86
  Badgall village, ii. 377
  Bagg, James, iii. 358
  Bagge, Fisart, a sea captain, ii. 36. Sir James, of Plymouth 13
  Bagwell, i. 209, 407
  Baines, Mr. ii. 124.――Captain, iii. 91
  Bake, ii. 76. Account of 67
  Baker, Nicholas, ii. 423.――The Chronicler, iii. 163, 182.――His
    Chronicle, ii. 60, 182, 342――iii. 144.――Family, iv. 109
  Baldue mine, account of, ii. 309
  Baldwin of Colquite, arms of, iii. 66
  ―――― Exceter, iv. 111
  Bale, i. 295――iii. 277――iv. 111, 145.――His writings on Britain, ii. 62
  Balfour, Sir William, iv. 188
  Baliol College, Oxford, i. 318 _bis_――ii. 147――iii. 97, 344
  Ballachise, iv. 146
  Balls, Mary, ii. 365. Mary, wife of Theodore Paleolagus 372.
    William, her father ib. William 365. No traces of the family
    remaining 372
  Baltic sea, iv. 21
  Bampfield, ii. 293
  Banbury, Richard, iii. 382
  ―――― borough, Mr. Praed, M.P. for, iii. 10
  Banda, in the East Indies, capture of, ii. 216
  Bandy, Rev. Daniel, of Warleggon, iv. 129
  Banfield, Mr. iii. 125
  Bangor, Stanbury, Bishop of, iii. 255
  ―――― monastery, i. 289
  Bankes, Anne, F. and Henry, iii. 220
  Bant, William, iii. 42
  Baptist, St. John, iii. 82
  Baragwaneth, John, iv. 55
  Barbadoes, iii. 183.――Colonel Kendall, governor of, iv. 23
  Barbiague, i. 153
  Bards, druidical, i. 192
  ―――― verses on Arthur’s sepulchre, i. 337
  Barham, Dr. iii. 11, 100
  Baring, Alexander, i. 151――ii. 314
  Barnet heath, anecdote of the battle of, ii. 182
  Barnewell, George, iii. 102
  Barnstaple, iv. 107
  Baron, family, Jasper, Mr. iii. 377
  Baron of Lestwithiel, Mr. iii. 24
  ―――― of Trelynike, Christopher, i. 379
  Baronius, i. 206, 214.――His agonal, iii. 434
  Barret family, John, ii. 89. Roger 192. Mr. and arms 89
  Barrett, Mr. ii. 89
  Barrow, an ancient, i. 187
  ―――― John, ii. 192
  Barrows, the five, iv. 32
  Barry, ii. 119 _bis_.
  Bartholomew hospital cased with Bath stone, i. 58
  Bartholomew, “De Propriet. Rerum,” i. 163
  ―――― St. his feast, ii. 220――iii. 324.――Act of Uniformity to be
    professed before, ii. 220. Two thousand clergy deprived of their
    benefices upon, in 1662, 307
  Bartine castle, i. 230
  Barton, etymology of, ii. 152, 153
  ―――― Charles, iii. 154
  Basil, Emperor, his menology, ii. 36
  ―――― St. his Sermon in praise of St. Julyot, ii. 274
  Basill, account of, i. 198. Etymology 199
  Basingstoke hundred, ii. 208
  ―――― manor, ii. 208
  Baskeville, i. 206
  Basset, i. 160, 266. Sir Francis 114.――Francis, ii. 413. Sir
    Francis, ordered to defend St. Michael’s mount, the mount granted
    to him 213. His cup, given to the corporation of St. Ives 259,
    271. Thomas, William 428.――Richard, iv. 28. Sir Thomas 187
  Basset of Pencoose, William, i. 391
  ―――― Trewhele, John, i. 391
  ―――― of Tyhiddy, Sir Francis, i. 163 _ter._ John 86. J. P.
    259.――Family, ii. 199, 234, 235, 238 _bis_, 239, 241, 242. Hon.
    Frances 250. Francis 98, 235, 242 _bis_, 243 _ter._ Sir Francis
    235 _ter._, 236, 243 _bis_, 245, 246, 247, 248 _ter._ Baron 249.
    George 239. John 188, 235 _ter._, 243. John P 239, 242, 244. Sir
    John 239. Lady 240. Lucy 243. William 235 _bis_. Mr. 236. Rev. Mr.
    234. Mrs. 242. Arms 239.――Francis, iii. 38 _ter._, 229, 381, 445.
    Francis, Lord De Dunstanville 239, 271. John 239. J. P. 380.
    Margaret 445. William 381. Lady 390. Miss 8. Mr. 133, 381 _bis_.
    Seized by Mr. Boscawen 217. Mrs. heir of the Pendarves family 303.
    Family 384, 390.――John, iv. 152, 154 _bis_. Family 154
  ―――― Umberleigh, i. 368.――Sir John, ii. 239
  ―――― signature to Magna Charta, ii. 242
  Bassett, ii. 176
  Bastard, i. 319. Sir William 319. Arms 320
  Baswedneck manor, iv. 166
  Bate, Sarah, i. 355
  Bath, i. 56――ii. 215, 295――iii. 123, 252
  ―――― Battle of Lansdowne, near, ii. 349
  ―――― John, Earl of, i. 104.――Earl of, governor of Pendennis castle,
    ii. 14. John, Earl of 6. Bought St. Mawe’s castle 277. Sir John
    Grenville, created Earl of 345. John Grenville, Earl of 339, 340.
    His iniquitous proceedings to recover property sold by his father
    333. Earls of 340
  ―――― three brothers named, iv. 3
  ―――― oolite, a house at Truro, built of, ii. 33
  ―――― and Wells, Thomas Ken, Bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  ―――― stone transported to Truro and London, and St. Bartholomew
    hospital cased with, i. 58
  Bathsheba, i. 329
  Bathurst, Allen and Jane, iii. 249
  Batten, John, character of, and of Rev. J. H. iii. 95. Family 94 and 95
  Battin, account of, ii. 227
  ―――― of Battin family, Miss, ii. 227
  Battle Abbey Roll, iii. 142
  ―――― deanery of, i. 147
  Bauden, i. 247, 397
  ―――― of Gudden, Reginald, strange story of, ii. 300
  Baudree, i. 243
  ―――― Rev. Mr. iii. 182
  Bavi, in Italy, iv. 172
  Bawden, i. 8――ii. 316
  ―――― of Looe, Mr. iv. 32
  Bawdry, Rev. Daniel, of Quethiock and Worlegan, iii. 372
  Baxter, etymology of, iv. 8 _quin._
  Bay of Biscay, ii. 246
  Bayley, Rev. J. vicar of St. Mervyn, iii. 179
  Bayliff family, ii. 259, 260
  ―――― of Blackmore, iii. 213
  Bayton parish, iii. 118
  Beachey head, iii. 10. High water at 98
  Beacon, a Danish intrenchment, ii. 56
  ―――― etymology and purpose of, iii. 394
  Beale, Matthew, i. 2――iv. 44
  ―――― of St. Teath, i. 2
  Bealtine, in Cornwall, fires on May day, in honour of the sun, iv. 8
  Bear, i. 224
  ―――― Grace, William, ii. 396
  Beare, Mr. ii. 261.――Thomas, iv. 22. William 22 _bis_. Miss, Mr. and
    arms 22
  ―――― of Killigarth, iv. 161
  ―――― Trenarall, George, and his arms, i. 405
  Bearford, ii. 256
  Beauchamp family, ii. 130 _quat._ Guy 130. John 123, 133. Joseph
    133. Stephen 130. William 130 _bis_. Arms 130.――Lord, and his
    nephew, iv. 186
  ―――― monument at Gwennap, ii. 135
  ―――― of Bletsho, ii. 130
  ―――― of Chyton, Luke and Peter, iii. 315
  ―――― of Hatch, ii. 130
  ―――― Earl of Warwick, arms, ii. 130
  ―――― of Trevince, Peter, iii. 303
  Beauford, John, i. 216
  ―――― of Lantegles, i. 105
  ―――― James, i. 222
  ―――― John, Duke of Somerset, John his father, and Margaret, iii. 65
  Beaulieu or Bewley abbey, Hants, ii. 190, 191, 327. King John’s
    reasons for founding it, Latin 327. English 328. Afforded
    sanctuary to Queen Margaret and Perkin Warbeck 329
  Beaumont, ii. 119 _bis_. William 195. William Lord 185.――Mrs.
    Dorothy and her daughter, iii. 38
  Beauties of England and Wales, i. 183, 194――iii. 244
  Beavill of Guarnack or Killygarth, ii. 332 _bis_.
  Becagh, Thomas, iv. 146
  Becanus, Goropius, i. 192
  Becher, the introducer of reverberatory furnaces, iii. 343
  Becker, i. 366
  Becket, St. Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, iii. 177.――His day
    177, 179. His death 177. His church in St. Mervyn 177. One of his
    murderers 246
  ―――― of Curturtholl, iii. 170 _bis_. Arms 170
  Bedack or Bessake manor, account of, ii. 353, 354 _bis_.
  Beddoes, Dr. iii. 94. His life, chemical experiments, and character 251
  Bede, the Venerable, iii. 167, 364――iv. 42, 43.――Has preserved a
    letter of Pope Gregory in his Ecclesiastical History, ii. 288
  Bedeverus, i. 335
  Bedford, i. 294――ii. 76
  ―――― Earl of, i. 65. Francis Russell, Earl of 65. Duke of 26
  ―――― Daniel, ii. 160.――Rev. Mr. 276. Miss, iii. 196.――Rev. John of
    St. Wenn, iv. 137, 140
  Bedfordshire, i. 369――Chalk hills in, iii. 10. The Cornwalls 22
    times sheriffs of 449
  Bedingfield, Sir Robert, iii. 140
  Bedoke or Besake in Lasake, iii. 359
  Beel arms, ii. 252
  Beer, Mr. ii. 259
  Beere, Mr. iii. 65
  Bees, St. in Cumberland, iii. 158
  Beiltine in Ireland, _see Bealtine_
  Belfour, i. 113
  Belimaur, father of Cassibelan, i. 10
  Bell rock, near the Forth, lighthouse upon, iii. 378
  Belloprato, Rodolphus de, ii. 107
  Bellot 301, 302. Anne, Christopher 349. Francis 356. Renatus 302,
    303. Arms 302.――Rev. Mr. of Maddern, iii. 78. Family 423
  ―――― of Bochim, i. 357. Of Bochym 356――ii. 227
  Bells, ceremony of christening, iii. 210
  Benalleck chapel, i. 242
  Benedict’s, St. monks, i. 73
  Benedictine abbey, ii. 81
  ―――― monastery, i. 341
  ―――― monks, iv. 25.――Priory of, on St. Michael’s mount, ii. 174,
    176.――Walter de Exeter said to be one, iv. 111
  ―――― nuns, i. 73, 176.――Monastery of, in France, iii. 141
  ―――― rule, iv. 100
  Benedictines, priory of, at West Conworthy, iii. 103
  Benedictus Abbas, i. 96
  Benett’s, barton, iv. 152, 154
  ―――― St. in Lanyvet, iii. 111
  Bengal, iii. 188
  Benham, Lord, i. 124
  Beni, i. 77
  Benin, bight of, iv. 90
  Bennet, Rev. Joseph, ii. 338. His father 339. Richard 192.――R. G.
    iii. 274.――Adam and Anne, iv. 75. Rev. John 40
  ―――― of Renton, Devon, John, iv. 75 _ter._
  ―――― of Hexworthy, Edward, iii. 2 _bis_, 3; Honor and Richard 3.
    Family 2. Arms 3
  ―――― St. Monastery in Lanivet, ii. 338 _bis_. Interesting remains,
    history involved in obscurity, attached to Bodmin priory 386. Made
    defence in civil war, modern vicissitudes 387.――Pider, an alien
    priory, iv. 101
  Bennett, i. 276――ii. 212
  ―――― George, ii. 377
  Benthamia passifera, iv. 181
  Bere, George, i. 406
  ―――― of Leskeard, i. 406
  ―――― Alston, Devon, ii. 118
  Berengarius of Angiers, i. 110, 111
  Bergh in Flanders, iii. 33
  ―――― St. Winnox or Winoe, iv. 157
  Beriman, George, iv. 55
  Berimus, St., Bishop of Dorchester, ii. 60
  Berkeley, James Lord, i. 313.――Charles, Viscount Falmouth, ii. 11.
    Lord Berkeley of Stratton 23, 117. Sophia, his daughter 23, 117.
    Viscount Falmouth’s arms 11. Barbara, iii. 201. Thomas, Lord 163.
    William, Lord B. of Stratton 201. Judge 144. Family 90.――Sir John,
    iv. 14 _quat._ Lord Berkeley of Stratton, and arms 14. Family, ii.
    192――iv. 139
  Berkley, of Bruton, Somersetshire, Sir Maurice, iv. 14
  Berkshire, ii. 139
  Bernard, i. 410
  ―――― St. ii. 225
  Bernard of Bodmin, Benedict and John, iii. 324
  Bernevas, iv. 160
  Berriman, Henry, i. 273, 276
  Berry, John, ii. 196
  ―――― court, Barton, account of, ii. 232
  ―――― park, iv. 31 _bis_, 32
  Berrycomb, i. 93
  Berryhill, i. 93
  Bertin, St. Abbot of Sithian, iv. 157
  Berwick, ii. 76
  ―――― John de, iii. 2
  Berwoldus, Bishop of Cornwall, ii. 60
  Bespalfan chapel, i. 225
  Best, i. 391
  ―――― of St. Wenn, Edward, his booty at Penzance, iii. 82
  Betenson, family and arms, iii. 23
  Betham, Sir William, iv. 144
  Bethsaida, St. Andrew born at, iv. 100
  Bettesworth, John, LL.D. and John, iii. 205
  ―――― of Clithurst, Thomas, iii. 206
  ―――― of Fyning, in Rogate parish, Sussex, Thomas, iii. 205. Family
    206. Nine descents 205
  Bettison, Richard, iii. 358
  Beverley, i. 141
  Bevill, John, i. 406. Sir Richard 16. John 17. Descent of the family
    16. Arms 17.――Elizabeth, iv. 22, 162. John 22. Peter, Philip, and
    Sir William 22, 162. Arms 22, 72
  ―――― of Gwarnack family, iv. 22, 162
  ―――― family, monument to one of them, iv. 36
  ―――― of Killigarth, in Talland, ii. 343
  Bewes of Carnedon, Thomas, iii. 459
  Beyworthye, ii. 430
  Bicketon, account of, i. 410
  Bickford, i. 223, 349
  ―――― of Deansland, Devon, Arscott, iv. 130
  Bickton, account of, i. 412
  ―――― of Bickton, arms, i. 412
  Biddulph, Sir Theophilus, of Westcombe, Kent, iii. 162
  Bideford, ii. 221
  ―――― bridge, erection of, ii. 341
  Bigberry of Bigberry, Sir William, i. 346
  Bignonia grandiflora, iv. 181
  Bikesleya, Osbert, ii. 427
  Billett, ii. 212
  ―――― Rev. Mr. iii. 171
  Billing of Hengar, family and heir of, iv. 94, 95. Gentlemen of
    blood and arms, their marriages and arms, Tredinick gave the same,
    iv. 95
  Billinge, Sir Richard, iii. 140. Richard 141, 150
  Bilson, iii. 206
  Bindon or Bindown hill, iii. 250, 253――iv. 32
  Binerton, ii. 260
  Binks, Philip, ii. 189
  Binmerton, chapel at, i. 288
  Binony manor, iv. 16 _bis_.
  Biny, i. 329
  Birch of Pembrokeshire, Sir Robert, and his daughter, iii. 326
  Bird, Mr. monument to, and Mr. of Devon, iii. 426
  Birge, Berty, i. 149
  Birkhead, Mr. i. 8
  Birne, Patrick, iv. 146
  Birthdays, celebration of, ii. 228
  Bishop, Rev. Mr. i. 224. Family 213.――Rev. Mr. ii. 130.――Mr.
    memoir of, iii. 143
  Bishop’s book, iii. 380
  ―――― jurisdiction, Temple parish lies out of, iv. 149
  ―――― Tawter, iii. 415
  Bishops, committal of seven to the Tower, iii. 297, 298. Feelings
    excited by it 298. List of their names 299. Song on the subject 298
  Blacaler, John, ii. 195
  Black, Ensign, i. 267, 275
  ―――― Book of the Archbishops of Dublin, iv. 146
  ―――― canons, i. 73 _ter._
  ―――― friars mendicant, i. 83
  ―――― Haye, iv. 161
  Black jack, ii. 310
  ―――― monks, iii. 232
  ―――― prince, ii. 155, 176――iii. 239
  ―――― rock, ii. 1, 2
  ―――― island, iv. 72, 230
  Blackburn, i. 153
  Blackheath, Kent, iii. 388.――Rebel camp at, i. 87
  Blackston, i. 109. Of London 204
  Blake family, ii. 362. General 26. His defeat of Van Tromp and De
    Witt, and his own defeat by Van Tromp 25. Entertained by Captain
    Penrose, illiterate 26. His origin 27
  Blake of Ford castle, Northumberland, Anne, and Sir Francis, iii.
    200, 201
  Blakiston, Sir M. Bart., iii. 138
  Blanchard manor, ii. 304. Account of by Hals 300. By Tonkin 302.
    Tin-mines in 302
  Blandinberg, ii. 127
  Blase, St. by Leland, iv. 275
  ―――― St. church, iii. 372 _bis_.
  Blatchford, Mr. iii. 14
  Blathwayte, i. 221. William 221
  Blayble farm, ii. 256
  Blaze, St. i. 41
  ―――― History of, by Hals, i. 52. By the Editor, Patron of cloth
    manufacture 55, and of Ragusa 55. His feast 53
  Blazey, St. bay, iv. 124
  ―――― bridge, i. 60――iii. 57, 59
  ―――― highway, i. 56
  ―――― parish, i. 41, 152――ii. 314, 393, 398――iii. 55, 58 ――iv. 99
  BLAZEY, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, saint’s history, i.
    52. Fair, Rosilian, principal inhabitants 53. By Tonkin, Roselian,
    Trenawick, Trengreene 54. By the Editor, saint’s history,
    broadcloth manufacture 55. Birthplace of Ralph Allen, Esq., his
    history 56. Statistics and Geology by Dr. Boase 59
  Blekennock town, iv. 229
  Blencowe, Mr. Justice, iii. 417
  Bletius, Prince of Wales and Cornwall, iii. 80
  Blewet of Colon, Miss, and arms, iv. 95, _see Bluet_
  ―――― of Cornwall, i. 210. Colon 210. Robert 210 _bis_. Arms 210
  ―――― of Hampshire, arms, i. 210
  Blewet of Holcomb Rogus, i. 210
  Blewett, George, iv. 214, 215 _bis_. John 215, 216. Mr. 216, 219.
    His large property 219. Family monuments 219
  Blewett of Marazion, George, ii. 83
  Bligh, John, i. 216. Family 78, 396.――Captain William, of the
    Bounty, iv. 45. Family 139
  ―――― of Botadon, i. 237
  ―――― of Botathon, William, ii. 304
  ―――― of Carnedon family, iii. 459
  Blissland, i. 103, 129, 167, 174――ii. 56, 151
  ―――― church, robbery of, i. 61
  ―――― manor, jurisdiction and possessors, i. 61
  ―――― parish (or Bliston) in Trigshire, iii. 125, 224――iv. 48, 49, 50
  BLISSLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 60.
    Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, ancient state,
    jurisdiction of manor, possessors, tin-mines 61. By Tonkin,
    etymology 61. By the Editor, statistics, two incumbents in 115
    years, Geology 62
  Blockhead, ii. 331
  Bloflemmen parish, iii. 463
  Blois of Penryn, John, Roger, and family, iii. 62
  Bloughan Pille, by Leland, iv. 277
  Blount, Elizabeth, i. 64
  Blount’s Tenures, i. 153――iii. 442――iv. 7
  Bloyse, Mr. ii. 97
  Bluet, Edward, i. 316
  ―――― of Little Colan, Colan, iii. 318. Elizabeth 319. Richard 318
    _bis_, 319
  Bluett, Mrs. i. 315.――Mr. ii. 375――Rev. T. L. of Mullion, iii. 258
  Bluisdale, St. Patrick born at, ii. 65
  Boaden, ii. 130
  Boar of Cornwall, i. 333
  Boase, Dr. ii. 340, 352.――Mr. iii. 95. Dr. H. S. secretary to the
    Geological Society 95, 100, 110 _bis_, 118. His Geology of
    Cornwall 371. Family 94
  Boats with paddle wheels, iv. 17
  Bocarne, i. 369. Etymology 85
  Bocconia cordata, iv. 181
  Bochym, i. 356. Account of 301, 303
  ―――― arms, ii. 131
  ―――― of Bochym, John, i. 301. Arms 302.――Robert, ii. 192
  ―――― in Cury, ii. 139
  Boconnoc, i. 112 _bis_, 113
  ―――― downs, i. 113, 114――iv. 186, 188
  ―――― parish, ii. 397――iii. 347――iv. 159, 184.――Living of, iii. 67, 451
  ―――― or Boconnock manor, iii. 437.――By Hals, possessors from Edward
    III., i. 63. By Tonkin, etymology 67. By the Editor, finest seat
    in Cornwall, and description 68. Governor Pitt’s purchase of 68
  BOCONNOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    antiquity as a manor, no endowed church 1294, patronage, land tax,
    i. 63. Statistics, poor rate, and Geology 72
  Bocunyan, ii. 151
  Bodanan tenement, iv. 43
  Bodcuike, iii. 449
  Boddenham, i. 91
  Bodecastle, iii. 233
  Bodenek, and trajectus, by Leland, iv. 279, 280, 290
  Bodenick, ii. 411. Account of 410
  Bodeworgy, i. 213
  Bodilly Vean, ii. 137
  ―――― Veor, ii. 137
  Bodleat castle, iv. 229
  Bodley, John, ii. 196
  Bodman or Bodmin bishopric, i. 73――ii. 95.――Bishop of, i. 231,
    250――ii. 299――iv. 116
  ―――― borough, i. 367, 368――iv. 46.――Boyer, mayor of, ii. 198. George
    Hunt, M.P. for 381.――William Peter, M.P. for, iii. 333. S. T.
    Spry, M.P. for, ii. 35――iii. 446
  ―――― Martin, Canon of, i. 97, 98
  ―――― church of St. Peter at, i. 74, 76. Steeple 75
  ―――― downs, ii. 187
  ―――― manor, iii. 238. With Keyland in Bodman and Lostwithiel
    parishes 359
  ―――― market, iii. 16
  ―――― parish, i. 133, 167, 174――ii. 60, 379, 384――iii. 58
  BODMIN parish, situation, boundaries, ancient name, etymology, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, school-house, secular
    church, now in ruins, i. 76. Bonehouse, British entrenchment 77.
    Court leet, Crown rent 78. Franciscan friary of St. Nicholas, to
    what uses converted 79. Its font, founder, his history 80.
    Miracles 82. History of the order 82. Lancar 83. Suicide of Mr.
    Mount Stephens 84. Bocarne 85. Flammock’s rebellion 86. Bodmin,
    the rendezvous of Perkin Warbeck’s forces, and of Arundell’s
    rebels 88. By Tonkin, etymology 91. By Whitaker, church, school
    91. Market, Grey Friars, bones found there 92. Chapels and
    almshouses of St. Anthony and St. George 93. Priory church, and
    Vivian’s tomb 94. By the Editor, church and monastery of St.
    Petroc 95. Histories by Whitaker and Wallis, story from Benedictus
    Abbas 96. Translated 98. By Wallis, benefice and patron,
    dimensions and history of church, destroyed by lightning,
    pinnacles dangerous, chapel of St. Thomas, tower at Berry, church
    and churchyard 100. Prior Vivian’s tomb, donation of organ. By the
    Editor, carving in the church 101. Painted window, statistics, and
    Geology 102
  ―――― priory of St. Peter or St. Petroc, i. 73, 116, 232――ii. 332,
    382, 386――iii. 24, 238, 277, 279――iv. 137, 162.――Dissolved its
    property and royalty, i. 74.――Documents relating to, Appendix XI.
    iv. 337.――House, i. 74
  ―――― Prior of, i. 74, 230, 231 _ter._, 246, 250, 289, 294, 371, 373,
    405――ii. 62, 151――iii. 175, 237, 279――iv. 137, 138, 160.――Roger, i.
    97, 98. List of priors 75.――Thomas Vivian, iii. 279
  ―――― races, ii. 35
  ―――― railroad to, from Wade bridge, i. 376
  ―――― road, ii. 390
  ―――― stone, iii. 21
  ―――― town, ii. 51, 151, 154 _bis_, 187, 188 _bis_, 192, 193 _bis_,
    195――iii. 26, 189, 278――iv. 187.――Erected into a coinage town,
    wholesale market, borough writs, principal inhabitants, precept
    for elections, i. 78. Importance, weekly market, fairs, number of
    churches 79. Decay 93. Record and council rooms, floor giving way
    100. Discovery of records 101.――Burnt by the Danes, ii. 60. County
    gaol built at 431. Two brothers left for London to seek their
    fortunes 34. John Robarts, Viscount of 379. Robert Robarts,
    Viscount of 379 _bis_. Esteemed by Charles II. 380.――A Bishop’s
    see, iii. 408. See transferred there 267. Bishop of 456. St.
    Petroc’s church in 277. Monastery at 278
  Bodmyn by Leland, iv. 261
  Bodregen of Trengreene, i. 55
  Bodrigan, Sir Henry, i. 417, 418, 421
  ―――― family, ii. 106, 114. Variances with the Haleps 109. Arms 107.
    Sir Henry 115, 317. His escape from Bosworth field, and wonderful
    leap, Sir Richard Edgecumbe’s escape from him 108. His history by
    the Editor, his property divided between Edgecumbe and Trevanian,
    attacked near his own house 115. His manor of Newton given to
    Trevanian 318. Isabel 398. Otho 107 _quat._ William 398. Arms of
    William 107.――Sir Henry, iii. 294. Mr. 393. Family 190, 203, 293.
    Struggle with the Edgecumbes for each other’s property, lost
    theirs at Bosworth 204.――Family, iv. 21, 71
  ―――― de, family, monument to, iii. 292
  ―――― of Restronget, Wm. de, and family, attainted, iii. 226
  ―――― manor, account of, ii. 106, 114
  ―――― leap, ii. 108
  Bodrigge in Kellark, ii. 143
  Bodrigy, account of, ii. 343
  Bodrugan, Henry de, family, ii. 363.――Arms, iii. 119
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 274
  Bodrugons, ii. 100
  Bodville, Charles, Earl of Radnor, iv. 73
  Bodwanick village, ii. 355
  Body, Mr. ii. 192
  Boerhaave, iii. 49
  Boggan, Zacharias, Mayor of Totness, his arms, ii. 320
  Boggans, ii. 320
  Bohelland farm, story of a melancholy and dreadful murder at, ii. 100
  Bohemia, John of Luxemburg, King of, ii. 72
  Bohun, Humphrey de, Earl of Hereford and Essex, and Margaret, i. 63
  Bohurra manor, ii. 276――iii. 209
  Boia, i. 107
  Boii, i. 107
  Bojil village, ii. 81
  Bokelby in St. Kew, iii. 61
  Bokelly, account of, ii. 335
  Bokiddick village, ii. 385
  Bolerium, supposed to be Land’s End, ii. 21
  ―――― cove, iii. 259
  Boligh family, John, ii. 398. William 398
  Bolitho, Messrs. ii. 125.――Family, iv. 67
  Bollandists, iii. 33
  Bolleit, i. 141. Geoffrey de 142
  Bolton, Duke of, ii. 257, 363――iii. 46, 118. Henry the last Duke
    47.――His heirs, iv. 58
  Bolytho, Alexander, ii. 160
  Bombay, iii. 188
  Bonaventure, St. i. 81 _ter._, 82. His Hymns 82. His Life of St.
    Francis 81
  ―――― Thomasine, her history, name, birth, iv. 132. Went to London,
    married her master, a rich widow twice 133. Thirdly, her death,
    founded many works of piety and charity 134
  Bond, ii. 256――iii. 246 _bis_, 250 _ter._, 252,  293, 378――iv. 25,
    37, 38.――His History of Looe, iii. 378.――His Topographical
    Sketches, i. 178, 321――ii. 295 _ter._――iii. 45, 120, 121――iv.
    25.――Henry, i. 383
  ―――― of earth, ii. 101
  ―――― of Looe, Thomas, iii. 348
  Bone, Richard, ii. 353 _bis_, 354. Arms 353.――Family, iv. 161 _bis_.
  Bonealvy, ii. 430
  Boniface, his life, iv. 126. The name 127
  ―――― Pope, ii. 288
  Bonifant, John, ii. 189
  Bonithan of Kertleowe, Alice, iv. 107
  Bonithon of Bonithon, Jane, iii. 225, 228. Her character 225.
    Richard 225, and Richard 225 _bis_. Simon 225 _bis_. Family arms
    226 _bis_. Monument at Milor 228
  ―――― James, of Grampound, iii. 229
  Bonvill, ii. 71, 292
  ―――― of Killygarth, ii. 341
  Bonville, Sir William, Lord Bonville, iii. 294, 295, 350 _ter._
    Taken at the battle of St. Alban’s and beheaded 294. Sir William
    his son, and William his grandson, Lord Harrington, both killed at
    the battle of Wakefield 294.――Family, iv. 107
  Bonython, account of, i. 302. Etymology 303
  ―――― family, i. 125.――Charles, ii. 120. Family took the name of
    Carclew 337.――Miss, iv. 101
  ―――― of Bonython, i. 302. Charles, M.P. 302 _bis_. His suicide 303.
    John 302. John, Dr. John 303. Richard, his suicide, Roskymer 303.
    Thomas, arms 302
  ―――― of Carclew, i. 143, 302
  ―――― John, Richard, and the heiress, iii. 303
  Booth, John, Bishop of Exon, i. 218.――Henry, ii. 196
  Bordeny abbey, i. 200
  Borel, i. 192
  Borew, account of, i. 420
  Borlase, i. 16, 141 _bis_, 198, 398 _quater_.
  ―――― Dr. historian of Cornwall, i. 180, 184, 228 _bis_, 229 _quat._,
    341, 360 _bis_――iii. 84, 89, 137, 196, 244, 309 _bis_, 323, 324,
    329 _bis_, 340, 366 _bis_――iv. 29, 30, 31, 175. Rev. William,
    LL.D. ii. 218, 219, 285, 361. Vicar of St. Just 386
    _ter._――Biographical notices of, iii. 51.――His Antiquities, ii.
    285, 424――iii. 31, 80, 89, 244, 365, 386. His Collections 373. His
    diploma 50. His speculations on the Druids 31. His estimation
    among his countrymen 408. His MSS. 232. His Natural History of
    Cornwall 329, 366, 386. Pope’s letter to him 53. His works 49, 52.
    Their effects 49. His death 54. His sons 53, 54. His son 196.――His
    account of a Celtic superstition, ii. 206, and of St. Kebius
    338.――His Map, iv. 24. His Natural History 30
  ―――― Humphrey, i. 398. John 59. Nicholas 398. James 18. Arms
    18.――Ann, ii. 218 _bis_. Rev. Geo. 219. J. B. 218. Rev. Walter
    218. LL.D. 302. Vice-warden of the Stannaries 285. Rev. Mr. 299.
    Family 282, 285, 286.――Humphrey, iii. 317. Nicholas 358. Samuel
    88, 90. Dr. Walter 54. Vicar of Madden 82. His biography 84. Built
    the house at Castle Hornech 84. Dr. William, Rector of Ludgvan 49.
    Family 83, 88, 90, 94. Arms 84.――Family, iv. 141
  Borlase of Borlase in St. Wenn, ii. 282
  ―――― of Newland, ii. 282
  ―――― of Pendene, John, ii. 282. John, M. P. 285. Arms 282. Of
    Pendeen in St. Just, John father of the two doctors, iii. 84, 88
  ―――― of Sythney, ii. 282
  ―――― of Treludderin, Nicholas, i. 199
  ―――― of Treludra, i. 20, 397 _bis_.
  ―――― of Treludrow, Humphrey, iii. 238, 268. Memoir of 268. Family
    property 271 _bis_.
  ―――― manor, iv. 140
  ―――― Pippin, iii. 268――iv. 141
  ―――― Varth manor, iv. 139
  Borough system, i. 389
  Borthy, i. 386 _bis_. Ralph de 386
  Bosawsen, iii. 322
  Boscastel, by Leland, iv. 257
  Boscastle, iii. 234
  ―――― harbour, ii. 50
  Boscawen, Admiral, i. 148. Edward 384. Hugh 58. Hugh, Hugh 297. Hugh
    Viscount Falmouth 141. Right Honourable Hugh 294. John de,
    Lawrence 140. Nicholas 113. William 297. Arms 140. Family 145,
    386. Admiral, ii. 285. Bridget 68. Hugh 68. Hugh kept a school 32.
    Hugh created Viscount Falmouth 11. Right Hon. Hugh 277. P. C. to
    William, III. 54. Family 136, 255, 303, 304, 357.――Hugh, iv. 77.
    Colonel Nicholas 188. Family 1 _bis_
  ―――― of Boscawen Rose, i. 254. Lawrence 254.――St. Burian, fam. iii.
    213. Their marriages 213, 216
  ―――― of Nansavallen, Charles, ii. 299. Charles, M.P. 303
  ―――― of Tregothnan, Bridget, Hugh, i. 205. Hugh 249. Hugh 384. Hugh
    395, 396. Hugh, ii. 137. Right Hon. Hugh 299, 302, 303 _bis_. John
    302. Nicholas 304.――Bridget and her great dowry, iii. 216. Admiral
    Edward, memoir of 218. Elected for Cornwall 219. Edward, his death
    219. Edward Earl of Falmouth 220. Has rebuilt the house at
    Tregothnan 221. Lord Boscawen Rose took the first class degree at
    Oxford 221. G. E. third Viscount 220. Hugh 209, 212, 213 _ter._,
    214, 215, 236, 397, 464 _bis_. Hugh 216. Supported Wm. III. 216.
    Arrested James’s adherents 217. Raised to the peerage 217. V.
    Falmouth 397. Hugh, second Viscount, and his character 217.
    Nicholas 213. Colonel Nicholas, in the rebel army 183. Richard
    213. W. G., his death 219. Dr. Walcot’s verses on 220. Family 61,
    208, 258, 305, 419. Antiquity 215, name 215, obtained Tregothnan
    215. Benefactors of their neighbourhood, their part in the Civil
    War and in the Revolution 216. Family 305, 419
  ―――― of Trevellick, i. 254
  ―――― downs, i. 141
  ―――― Ros, i. 140. Etymology and possessors 145.――Rose, in St.
    Burian, iii. 215
  ―――― Rose, Lord, son of the Earl of Falmouth, iii. 221
  ―――― Un, i. 141 _bis_
  Bosence, account of, i. 360
  Bosinney borough, iv. 20
  Bosistow, account of, iii. 35
  ―――― Mr. of Treadreath, family and arms, iii. 35
  Bosithney, i. 323 _ter._
  Boskednan, i. 141
  Boskenna, i. 148 _bis_
  Boskenso manor, iii. 77
  Bosquet’s Book, i. 214
  Bossiney, account of, i. 340.――Or Bosinny by Leland, iv. 258
  ―――― cove, i. 343
  ―――― manor exchanged for Wining Winington, ii. 128
  Bostock, Edward, iv. 26
  Boston, America, iii. 72 _bis_. The people ungrateful to Mr. Peters 73
  Bostowda, ii. 330
  Bosvigo, ii. 318
  Boswallow, account of, i. 392
  Boswaydel, etymology, ii. 353
  Boswellick, i. 19
  Bosworgy, account of, i. 224
  Bosworth field, ii. 108 _bis_, 115 _bis_――iii. 206
  Boswortha, i. 29
  Botallack mine, and garnets at, ii. 291
  Botallock, account of, mines valuable, ii. 285. Produce copper below
    the tin 286
  Botelett manor, ii. 397
  Botolph’s, St. passage, iv. 185
  Botowne, iv. 111
  Botreaux, iv. 48
  ―――― castle, iii. 39, 234, 235 _bis_.――iv. 228.――Port of, iii. 235, 236
  ―――― William de, i. 340. Family 368.――Lord and family, ii.
    397.――William de, iii. 232. William 353.――Lord, iv. 138. His heir
    138, 139
  ―――― of Botreaux, William Lord B. and his daughter, iii. 234. Family 234
  ―――― of Penheale, i. 378. Richard, William 378
  ―――― honor of, iii. 234, 235
  Botusfleming parish, i. 162――ii. 361, 363, 364
  BOTUSFLEMING, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 103.
    Ancient state, value of benefice, land tax, Muttenham, i. 104.
    Father Peter’s rhymes, etymology by Tonkin, by Editor, singular
    occurrence 105. Statistics, rector, Geology 106
  Bouchier, Foulk, of Tavistock Lord Fitzwarren, i. 170. Lady Frances
    411. Henry, sixth Earl of Bath 411. Rev. Henry, and his daughter
    396. Richard, fifth Earl of Bath 411.――Jane and Captain Richard,
    iii. 187
  Bourdeaux, Joseph of Exeter, Archbishop of, i. 325
  Bouvardia tryphilla, iv. 181
  Bowden family, Reginald and arms, ii. 303
  ―――― of Trelisick, John, i. 399
  ―――― marks, i. 11
  Bower, Rev. J. of Lostwithiel, iii. 29
  Bowles, P. P. iii. 279
  Boy Bishop, monument of, in Salisbury Cathedral, ii. 313
  Boyeer, i. 88
  Boyer, Mayor of Bodmin, ii. 198
  Boyle, Edmund Earl of Cork, ii. 385. Family 354. Their share of the
    Courtenay property 385
  Boyle’s Biographical Dictionary, iv. 87
  Boyton, Robert de, ii. 412
  ―――― parish, ii. 234, 417, 429 _bis_――iv. 39, 40, 42, 61, 153
  BOYTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value of
    benefice, land tax, etymology, Bradridge, i. 107. Northcott, history
    of Agnes Prest 108. Mount Calvary, a Cornish poem 109. Doctrine of
    transubstantiation, etymology by Tonkin 110. By the Editor, place of
    Agnes Prest’s martyrdom, statistics, vicar, Geology 111
  Brabyn family, i. 223, 225.――Mr. executed, iii. 184
  Braciano, Duke of, ii. 371
  Braddock or Bradock parish, iii. 59, 347. Living of 451.――Rectory,
    i. 72
  Braddon, Henry, and Captain William, ii. 87. Mrs. 338. Family,
    account, of 87.――Mr. iii. 252.――Lieut. Colonel, iv. 188
  ―――― of Treglith, William, iv. 62. Mr. 62
  Brades, Barton of, ii. 153
  Bradford, ii. 429
  ―――― Rev. Mr. i. 292. Family 289
  Bradley, Dr. life of, ii. 376
  Bradoak or Bradock downs, i. 113, 114――iv. 185, 186 _bis_, 188
  ―――― parish, i. 167――iv. 129, 155
  BRADOCK St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value
    of benefice, endowment, land tax, i. 112. By Tonkin, patron,
    incumbent, manor 112. By the Editor, living consolidated, residence
    removed, patron 112. Bradock down, the scene of a royal victory in
    1623, and of Lord Essex’s escape in 1644, 113. Exasperation of the
    royalists, expulsion of rebels from Cornwall, King’s farewell to the
    sheriff 114. Statistics, and Geology 115
  Bradridge, i. 107
  Bradryche, ii. 429
  Brady, Dr. iii. 27――iv. 81.――His Treatise on Boroughs, ii. 200――iv.
    81 _bis_, 83, 84 _bis_
  Braghan or Brechanus, St. King of Wales, built the town of
    Brecknock, was father of St. Keyne, St. Canock, and St. Cadock,
    ii. 292. Had 24 daughters and 2 sons, all Saints 294
  Bralton Clovelly, living, iii. 67
  Bramer, Elizabeth W. and John, iii. 86
  Bramford, Earl of, a Royal Commissioner, iv. 189
  Branell or Brannell manor, ii. 100, 109 _bis_――iii. 195, 448 _ter._,
    451. Etymology 452. Extent 451
  Brannel forest, iii. 451, 452
  Brannell’s, Lady, tomb, ii. 114
  Branscomb, Walter, Bishop of Exeter, _see Brounscomb_
  Branston, Judge, iii. 144
  Bray, account of, iii. 250
  Bray, Reginald, i. 87.――Francis de, ii. 118. Lord 282, 311. Mary
    118. Ralph, Sheriff of Hants 310. Family 282, 284 _bis_
  ―――― of Bray in France, ii. 311
  ―――― of Bray in St. Just, ii. 310, 311
  ―――― of Cornwall, family, ii. 237
  ―――― of Killington, Sir Edward, ii. 310. Sir Reginald, arms 311
  ―――― manor, account of, ii. 282
  ―――― in Morvall, ii. 283
  Braydon, Captain, iii. 184
  Braye, de, family, i. 163 _bis_
  Brazen-nose College, Oxford, ii. 33
  Brazilwood, iii. 186
  Breaca, St. Life of, iv. 263
  Breadfruit tree, the Bounty went out to fetch plants of, iv. 45
  Breage, St. i. 263――ii. 353――iii. 431
  ―――― St. Church, iii. 285, 444
  ―――― St. parish, i. 115, 310, 344, 355――ii. 80――iii. 442.――Register,
    ii. 81. People of 82. Great Work mine at 83. Geology of, similar
    to Germow 85
  ―――― stone, i. 128
  Breath’s cattle, iv. 35
  Breca, St. iii. 342
  Brechan, St. painting of in St. Neot’s Church, ii. 298
  Brecknock, derivation of its name, i. 2. Built by King Braghan, ii. 292
  Breda, iii. 454. Lord Hollis, ambassador at 148
  Brend, George, iii. 387
  Brendon, William, iii. 163
  Brentford, Middlesex, i. 68――iii. 144
  Brenton, Henry, i. 24
  Breock, St. his history, i. 115
  ―――― church, i. 74――iii. 177
  Breock, St. parish, i. 301, 372, 373, 377, 406――ii. 80, 89, 253
    _bis_, 256, 257――iii. 334――iv. 137, 140, 160
  BREOCK, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    saint’s history, value of benefice, i. 115. Ancient state, Pelton
    manor, Hurston, Tredinick 116. Trevordei, by Tonkin, Etymology of
    Dunveth, by the Editor, statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 117
  BREOCK, St. in Kerrier parish, or Breage, by Hals, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, daughter churches, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, ancient state, i. 118. Pengelly, Godolphin
    119. Carew and Sammes on its etymology 120. Pengarwick 124. By
    Tonkin, a Cornish distich 124. King Germoe’s throne 125. By the
    Editor, Earl of Godolphin, stanza upon his pedigree 126. Parish
    covered with mines, Whele Vor Mine, first steam engine in
    Cornwall, Pengelly, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 128
  Brereton, Mr. Trelawney, i. 358
  Brest, ii. 127
  ―――― haven, ii. 171. A formidable combined fleet harbours in 247
  Bretagne, iv. 145
  Breton, Cape, iii. 218
  ―――― millers more hardy than Cornish, ii. 24
  Bretons, iii. 336
  Brett, captain, iv. 188. Charged the parliament army under Skippon,
    knighted on the field 188
  Brewar, or Brewer, William, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 75――iii. 182
  ―――― St. Breward, or Brewer parish, i. 62, 103, 174 _bis_, 254――iii.
    222, 223, 224――iv. 48, 49, 93, 95 Breward, St. or Simon Ward
    district, iv. 97. Porphyritic rocks in 99
  BREWARD, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, land-tax, founder of church, i. 129. His
    history, benefactions, impropriation of this benefice 130. By
    Tonkin, name of Simon-Ward 130. By the Editor, Lank Major, Lank
    Minor, Swallock, Hamethy, Roughtor, and Brown Willy 131.
    Statistics, vicar, patrons, Geology by Dr. Boase, sterility,
    loneliness of church, west fertile 132
  Brewer, i. 1, 60. William, Lord Brewer 129. William, Bishop of
    Exeter 129, 130 _bis_
  Bricot, i. 331 _bis_, 332
  Briddon, Lieut.-col. i. 113
  Bridge place, ii. 2
  ―――― street, Truro, iv. 80
  ―――― end meadow, iv. 31
  Bridgerule church, i. 133
  ―――― parish, ii. 413, 430――iii. 114――iv. 152 _bis_
  BRIDGERULE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, church in Devon,
    value of benefice, ancient state, by Tonkin, etymology, i. 133.
    Tackbere 134. By Editor, Tacabre, pedigree of Gilbert 134.
    Statistics, vicar 135
  Bridges, ii. 292
  Bridget, St. chapel at Landew, iii. 42
  Bridgewater, ii. 76. St. James’s hospital at, properly St. John’s
    412――iv. 254 _bis_
  Bridgman, Edward, ii. 196.――Sir Orlando, iii. 159
  Brigantes, i. 256
  Brightley, chapel at, ii. 348
  Brinn in Cornwall, ii. 348
  Brismar, ii. 208
  Bristol, i. 113, 373――ii. 76 _bis_――iii. 76, 89, 129.――Jonathan,
    Bishop of, i. 84.――St. James’s priory at, ii. 147.――Battle before,
    iii. 200, 204. Sir Jonathan Trelawney, Bishop of 296, 297 _ter._
    298 _quint._ One of the seven 296, 299. John Lake, Bishop of 296.
    Sir R. R. Vvyyan, M. P. for 137.――Henry Combe, mayor of, iv. 90.
    Mr. Coster, M. P. for 89
  ―――― channel, i. 381, 384――iii. 240
  ―――― waters, iii. 94
  ―――― John de, iii. 354
  ―――― frigate, iii. 186.――Commanded by Captain Penrose, ii. 25
  Britain, i. 335, 336 _bis_――ii. 1, 66, 75――iv. 116.――Churches of, i.
    294.――St. German travelled through, ii. 65. Various places
    dedicated to him in 75. Pelagians of 73. Pelagius, an inhabitant
    of 63.――Its Celtic inhabitants, iii. 49. St. Sennan came to 434
  ―――― Edmund of Hadham, Earl of, iii. 65
  Britany, i. 115――ii. 90, 123, 127――iii. 102, 281,
    285.――Pronunciation in, ii. 128
  ―――― Alan, Earl of, ii. 147
  British barrows, iii. 319
  ―――― camp, i. 369――iii. 111, 319
  ―――― channel, i. 26, 38, 41, 52, 135, 388――ii. 26, 36, 39, 50, 59,
    105, 106, 126, 171, 250, 319, 378――iii. 11, 102, 118, 129, 190,
    240, 257, 283, 421, 423, 429, 430, 436, 441, 442――iv. 19, 21, 23, 99
  ―――― Critic, iii. 407
  ―――― intrenchments, iv. 53, 94, 140
  ―――― minerals, greatest number of specimens from St. Just parish,
    ii. 291
  ―――― monarch, ii. 66
  ―――― Museum, i. 283, 300――iii. 154, 233, 408――iv. 33
  ―――― music, remnant of, ii. 166
  ―――― ocean, ii. 1 _bis_, 174, 237, 283――iii. 74 _bis_, 128, 198
  ―――― ornaments found, iii. 290
  ―――― tongue, iii. 114
  Britnall, John, ii. 196
  Brito, a poet, his lines on Arundell, iii. 149
  Britons, i. 295, 334――ii. 206, 261. Ancient, iii. 52, 365――iv. 168.
    their manner of writing. Religious ceremonies, and notion of the
    Deity, i. 193.――Believed in the appearance of St. Michael on their
    shore, ii. 172. Geruncius, King of 50.――Their names, iii. 130.
    Cadwallo, King of 284.――Inhabited one side of the Tamar, iv. 40
  Britton’s Beauties of England and Wales, i. 183, 194――iii. 244
  Britwyn, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Broadgate hall, Oxford, now Pembroke college, iii. 233
  Broadoak parish, iii. 348――iv. 159
  BROADOAK parish, additional sheet, by Hals, App. 4. Communicated by
    Mr. Polwhele; and supposed to be separated from the work in the
    bookseller’s hands. Situation, boundaries, etymology, iv. 184.
    Value of benefice, incumbent, and land-tax, Essex’s march to raise
    the siege of Plymouth, Sir Richard Grenville removes, Essex
    follows him, and encamps on Bradock downs, King Charles marches to
    Grenville’s assistance 185, and also encamps there, his overtures
    for peace, rejected by Essex, skirmishes, remarkable challenge
    186, and combat, related to Hals by several eye-witnesses, Essex
    obliged to retire 187. A battle 188. Treaty 189
  Brockland advowson in Kent, iii. 115
  Bromley of Lefeock, iii. 188
  Brook, Sir John, i. 87.――York herald, ii. 155
  Brook’s catalogue of Earls of Devon iii. 436
  Brounscomb, Walter, Bishop of Exeter, i. 209.――Founded a college,
    ii. 96. His death 97. Admonished in sleep to build Glasney college 341
  Brown, Anne and Rev. James, iii. 301. Dr. William, of Tavistock
    184.――James, iv. 4
  ―――― Walley, i. 201
  ―――― Willey, i. 131, 132, 188, 310――iii. 44
  Browne, George, of Bodmin, iii. 353, 459. G. F. C. 459. M. A. Lord
    Montague 231. William 153.――George of Bodmin, iv. 41
  Bruce, Edward, of Edinburgh, and his daughter, iv. 74
  Bruges in Flanders, iv. 14
  Brugmansia suaveolens, iv. 181
  Brune, Rev. C. Prideaux, i. 17――iii. 279
  Brunion, iii. 7
  Brutton, Elizabeth, i. 403
  Bryant of Bushill, John, and family, iii. 351
  Bryher island, iv. 174. Extent of 175
  Bryn, iv. 161, 162.――Barton of, ii. 94, 332, 335
  Buck, L. W. ii. 416
  Buckhurst, Lord, ii. 9
  Buckingham, George Villiers, Duke of, ii. 382.――Duke of, iii. 183
  ―――― of Probus family, iv. 161
  ―――― palace, iii. 205
  Buckinghamshire, i. 353.――Chalk hills in, iii. 10. Mr. Praed, M. P.
    for 11
  ―――― Earl of, ii. 265, 268, 270――iii. 406
  Bucknam, John, ii. 189
  Buckwell, Miss, of Tyringham, iii. 10
  Buclawranbucke, ii. 429
  Bucton, Thomas de, iii. 354
  Bude bay, iii. 349――iv. 12, 13
  ―――― village, iv. 17. A watering place 18
  Budeox, i. 348
  Budeoxhed of Budeoxhed, Agnes, i. 348. Elizabeth 348. Philip, Thomas
    348. Thomas 347. Winifred 348. Arms 348
  Budeoxhed church, i. 348
  Buderkvam, i. 242
  Budge, ii. 54
  Budock church, ii. 3
  ―――― parish, i. 236――ii. 1 _bis_, 2, 3, 92 _bis_, 94, 96――iii. 74,
    77.――Rev. G. Allen, vicar of, iv. 95
  BUDOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, etymology,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, i. 135. Killigrew
    monuments, Arwinick, Rosmeran, Trescobays, death of Sir R. Vyvyan,
    Treon 136. By Tonkin, Swan pool, Trewoon 137. By the Editor,
    Penwenis, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr. Boase 137. Export of
    granite, heave at Swan pool, bricks 138
  Budock, St. ii. 127, 128
  Budocus, St. by Leland, iv. 270
  Budok, St. by Leland, iv. 283
  Buggin, Robert, ii. 319
  Bull, Rev. J. of Lezant, iii. 43
  Buller, Adm. Sir Edward, i. 321. Family 74, 221, 230, 246,
    266.――John, ii. 397. John T. 394. Family 170.――Francis, monument
    to, iii. 292. Colonel F. W. 293. James 361. J. F. 291, 383.
    William, Bishop of Exeter 301. Mr. 253, 361. Family 148 _bis_,
    390, 462. Edward, brother of the judge, and Mrs. iv. 37
  ―――― of Downs, James W. iii. 249. Mr. 249, 427
  ―――― Rev. John, of St. Just in Penwith, and of Perran Zabuloe, iii. 333
  ―――― of Lillesdon, Somersetshire, family, iii. 463
  ―――― of Morval, i. 317 _bis_. John 250. John 411.――John, ii. 85. Mr.
    396.――Anthony, iii. 230. Edward, Francis 249. James 229, 248, 249.
    Jane 229, 249. John 230, 248, 249 _bis_. John 249, 293, 297, 381
    _bis_, 463. J. F. 248 _bis_. Arms 249.――Elizabeth and John, iv.
    25. Mr. 22
  Buller, of Portlooe, Edward, the judge, iii. 333, 117
  ―――― of Shillingham, Francis, iii. 212, 215, 248, 381, 463. Francis,
    story of 463. James 248. John 463, 464. Richard 463. Sir Richard
    463 _ter._ Family 212
  ―――― of Shillington, Francis, i. 396
  Bullock, i. 28, 44, 78, 84.――Philip, ii. 189
  Bullœum, or Buelt, in Brecknockshire, iv. 8
  Bullsworthy, Barton, account of, iii. 3
  Bulteel, ii. 151, 319.――Miss, iii. 134
  Bunerdake, in St. Ives, iii. 359
  Bungay, Friar, supposed to have, by magic, raised a mist at the
    battle of Barnet, ii. 182
  Bungred, King of Mercia, i. 49
  Burdett, Sir Francis, chief promoter of the Reform Bill, and Miss,
    iii. 205
  Burgess, Mr. ii. 157.――Thomas and Thomas, iv. 77
  ―――― of Truro, i. 225
  Burgh, etymology of, i. 77
  ―――― Hubert de, Earl of Kent, iii. 349
  Burghert, married to Grenville, ii. 341
  Burgoigne, i. 177.――William, recorder of Exeter, ii. 189
  Burgundian court, ii. 188
  Burgundy, i. 107, 335――ii. 75――iv. 117
  ―――― Margaret Duchess of, ii. 188
  Burgus manor, ii. 253
  Burian, St. church, i. 149 _bis_――iii. 30, 431
  ―――― deanery, i. 147――iii. 30
  ―――― parish, i. 141――ii. 60, 265.――Etymology, i. 142
  ―――― St. parish, i. 146, 321
  ―――― or Burien, or Buryan, St. parish, iii. 30, 36, 283, 290, 322,
    425 _bis_, 428 _quat._
  BURIAN parish, by Hals, situation, antiquity, etymology, by Camden,
    i. 138. Founder, a regal peculiar, college, Pope’s usurpation 139.
    Boscawen Ros, Boscawen family 140. Boscawen downs, Dance meyns,
    and other ancient remains 141. Bolleit’s stone, Trove 142.
    Entrenchment there 143. Subterranean vault, royalists concealed
    there in civil wars, Pendrea 143. Burnewall, lake, aloe 144. By
    Tonkin, parish extensive, climate warm 144. Improvements of Mr.
    Paynter, Leigha, Boscawen Rose 145. By Editor, etymology, deanery
    146. Ecclesiastical abuses, non-residence, Pendrea, curious
    shellwork at Burnuhall 147. Shells at Porth Kernow, Boskenna,
    Vyvyans of Trelovornow, recluses at Boskenna 148. Church,
    trigonometrical survey, statistics, rector 149. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, and by Editor 150
  Burien’s, St. college, by Leland, iv. 265, 286
  Burke, Lady Dorothy, ii. 93
  Burleigh, Lord Treasurer, i. 341. Mr. ii. 302
  Burlington, Earl of, ii. 326
  Burncoose, porphyry found near, ii. 136
  Burne, captain, ii. 25
  Burnell, Robert, iv. 146
  Burnevas, iv. 161
  Burnewall, etymology of, i. 144
  Burngullo, manor and village, iii. 197
  Burnuhall, curious shell-work at, i. 147
  Buroughs, of Ward bridge, i. 225
  Burrow Bel-les opened, description of, ii. 301
  Burthog, iv. 157
  Burveton, Walter de, iii. 2
  Burwaldus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415 _bis_
  Bury, St. Edmund, iii. 85
  ―――― Pomeroy, i. 296
  Buryan parish, ii. 48, 282 _bis_――iv. 2
  Buryana, St. i. 138
  Buryas bridge, iii. 99
  Buryen’s, St. by Leland, iv. 265, 286
  Busvargus, account of, ii. 86
  ―――― of Busvargus family, ii. 265, 286 _bis_
  Bute, Lord, ii. 245
  Butler, Simon, Lord of Lanherne, ii. 145 _bis_. Rev. Mr. 394
  ―――― Symon, iii. 139. Dr. 385, 434.――His Lives of the Saints, i;
    146――iii. 330, 332.――Colonel, iv. 189
  Bynany Castle, iv. 228
  Byron, Admiral John, his marriage, and “Narrative,” iii. 205.
    Grandfather of Lord Byron the Poet 205. Captain, his duel 152, 156
  Byzantine palace, ii. 366

  Cabellan, iv. 128
  Cabulian, i. 168 _bis_――iii. 89
  Cadbury, i. 337
  Cadd, Henry, iv. 18
  ―――― or Cadock, Earl of Cornwall, iii. 82, 462. His history, and
    arms, i. 203. Agnes or Beatrix, his daughter, iii. 463
  ―――― St. ii. 292
  Cadgwith, ii. 117, 331, 360――iii. 259, 424. Account of by Hals 421.
    By Editor 423
  Cadix, St. iv. 113
  Cadiz, iii. 98, 287
  Cadwallo, King of the Britons, iii. 284
  Caeling manor, iii. 267
  Caen in Normandy, university of, iv. 144, 145.――Michael Tregury, its
    governor, iv. 138, 144, 145
  Caer Brane, i. 230
  ―――― Broas, iii. 129
  ―――― Byan, iii. 129
  ―――― Cuby, i. 295
  ―――― Iske, i. 328 _ter._, 342
  ―――― Kief, iii. 316, 317 _bis_
  ―――― Kynock, account of, iii. 369
  ―――― Segont, i. 326
  ―――― Voza, iii. 366
  ―――― Went, in Wales, iv. 44
  Caerton, i. 261.――In Crowan, ii. 141
  Cæsar, i. 107, 323, 334――ii. 3――iii. 185 _ter._――Julius, i. 397. His
    Commentaries 193――ii. 237――iv. 116
  Cæsars, iii. 369
  Cagar quarry, ii. 117
  Cainham, in Holderness, Yorkshire, ii. 292
  Cair Kinan, by Leland, iv. 264
  Cairdine, by Leland, iv. 264
  Caitfala, i. 257
  Caius, St. Pope, and kinsman of Dioclesian, ii. 302
  Calais, i. 169 _bis_.――The siege of, ii. 159. Foy men assisted at
    39, 45
  Calamagrestis arenaria, iii. 6
  Calavega in Spain, i. 311
  Calceolaria, iv. 181
  Calenack, smelting house at, ii. 317
  Calendula tragus, iv. 181
  Calestock Rule, ii. 173
  ―――― Veor, ii. 173
  Calf, British-Cornish for, ii. 335
  Caliburne, i. 334
  Caligula, Caius, Emperor of Rome, iii. 184
  Calimontana, i. 206
  Call, family and arms, i. 162.――Sir William, ii. 231.――George, iv.
    41. Sir George 9, 41. Memoir of 9. Sir John 136. Sir William P. 11
  Callington borough, John Call, M.P. for, iv. 10
  ―――― manor, its possessors, ii. 313
  ―――― parish, i. 159, 316――ii. 231
  CALLINGTON parish, by the Editor, appendage to Southill, situation,
    boundaries, members of parliament, markets and fairs, manor, i.
    151. Church and town, monuments, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 152
  Callmady, ii. 136
  Calstock parish, i. 151, 159, 310, 316――iii. 101――iv. 6, 7.――Chapel
    at 322
  CALSTOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, founder,
    patron, first-fruits, incumbent, land-tax, free-fishing granted,
    salmon wear, i. 153. Cuthele, by the Editor, extensive mines,
    Cotehele 154. Description of 155. View of the chapel 156. Visit of
    George III. and Queen Charlotte 157. Garden chapel 157. Battle of
    Bosworth, Harewood, Sandhill 158. Statistics, rector, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 159. Canal 160
  ―――― Ruol, etymology, iii. 325
  ―――― Veor, iii. 321
  Calvin, iii. 188
  Calway, John, iii. 261
  Camber island, iv. 238
  Camborne or Cambourne parish, i. 128――ii. 56, 250 _bis_, 337――iii.
    248, 367, 387, 389, 390――iv. 5
  CAMBOURNE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    holywell, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    Pendarves, i. 160. Menadarva, story of Mr. Arundell 161. Roswarne,
    apparition, crane, Treswithan 162. By the Editor, rapid rise of
    the town, church tower, market, Pendarves 163. Menadarva,
    Roswarne, Crane, Mr. R. Trevithick, statistics 164. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Delcoath, and Cock’s kitchen mines 165. Soil good near the
    town, barren further north 166
  Cambræa, ii. 225
  Cambrensis, Giraldus, iv. 113
  Cambridge, i. 72――ii. 76, 104
  ―――― university, iii. 72, 454――iii. 270
  Cambridgeshire, ii. 97.――Chalk hills in, iii. 10
  Camburne de, i. 359. John and John 348
  ―――― parish, i. 261――ii. 136, 141 _bis_, 144, 234, 239 _bis_
  Camden, the antiquary, i. 85, 138, 146, 168, 178, 179――ii. 65, 172
    _ter._, 173, 237, 257, 258, 283, 293, 402, 403, 418――iii. 1, 24
    _bis_, 25 _ter._, 129, 149, 313, 336, 357――iv. 8, 44, 75, 79.――His
    Britannia, i. 120, 213, 220, 257, 325――iii. 430.――His history
    lecture at Oxford, ii. 233.――His annals of Queen Elizabeth, iii.
    368. His Editor 226
  ―――― Lady, i. 72
  Camel river, i. 117, 132, 372 _ter._, 377.――A winding channel, ii.
    40. Ran with blood 40
  Camelford borough, i. 74, 94, 117, 337, 340――ii. 154, 236, 338――iii.
    81, 89, 136, 235――iv. 20.――An adjective, ii. 171.――Battle at, iii.
    322. Roman road through 324.――The mayor of, ii. 236. Charles
    Phillipps, M. P. for 399――iv. 45
  ―――― Thomas Pitt, Lord, ii. 405.――Thomas Pitt, first Lord, i. 69.
    His talents 71. Thomas Pitt, second Lord, his birth and
    christening, education, history, and character 70. Death 71
  ―――― manor, iii. 27
  ―――― town, etymology, name, ii. 402. Market and a fair, not a fair
      town, borough, had its first charter from Richard, Earl of
      Cornwall 403. Revenue, arms, rent paid to the Duke 404. Dr.
      Lombard passing through afterwards died at 406
  Camellia Japonica, iv. 181
  Camellot, i. 337
  Camp, vestiges of, at St. Syth’s, ii. 405
  “Campaign in the West Indies,” iii. 160
  Campion, i. 382
  Camps, two ancient, i. 39
  Canada, subjugation of, iii. 218
  Canarditone, ii. 145
  Candlemas day, iii. 7
  Canedon priory, ii. 429
  Canna bicolor, iv. 181. Indica 181
  Cannall Lydgye, account of, ii. 254
  Canock, St. ii. 292
  Canon of the mass, i. 198
  Canons Augustine, i. 73 _ter._, 168, 209, 217, 382――ii. 61
  ―――― monastery of, ii. 2
  ―――― priory of, at St. Germans, dissolved, ii. 62
  ―――― of St. Augustine at Launceston, ii. 87
  ―――― black ii. 70.――Black Augustine, iv. 156
  ―――― Clementine, ii. 60
  ―――― regular, college of at Glasnith, ii. 136
  Canterbury, Archbishop of, i. 139――ii. 428.――Baldwin, i. 342. Robert
    Kilwarly 83. John Martin 87.――St. Just, ii. 287. St. Mellitus
    288.――Theobald, and Simon Mepham, iii. 115. Mellitus 3rd Archbishop
    of 167. William Sancroft 296. One of the seven bishops 299
  ―――― cathedral, iii. 246
  ―――― Gervase of, iv. 112
  Canute, King, ii. 60, 61, 70. His laws 61, 62.――Ridiculous legend
    of, iv. 96
  Canutus, King, ii. 60
  Cape Cornwall, ii. 290
  Capgrave, i. 295――iii. 332――iv. 93.――His book of English Saints, ii.
    292.――His Aurea Legenda, iii. 167
  Capgrove’s Life of St. Neot, ii. 396
  Cappadocia, i. 52, 388
  Capraria lanceolata, iv. 181
  Car, i. 172
  Cara Villa, Peter de, ii. 209
  Carantochus, St. i. 245
  Carantokes, St. by Leland, iv. 268
  Carbill, Robert Fitz-Hamon, Earl of, ii. 344, 347
  Carborro or Carburrow manor, iv. 130
  Carclaze tin mine, i. 50
  Carclew Barton, account of, iii. 224, 228, 229. Tin upon 225. Aisle
    belonging to, in Mylor church 228. Fine woods of 305
  ―――― purchased and improved by Mr. Lemon, ii. 85
  Carclew of Carclew in Milor, ii. 337
  Cardenham parish, ii. 187――iv. 47, 49, 50, 128, 129, 131, 155――or
    Cardinham, ii. 224, 260, 266
  Cardew, Rev. Dr. C. i. 402 _ter._――Dr. Cornelius, iii. 18.――Rev. Dr.
    master of Truro school, his monument in St. Erme’s church, iv. 85
  Cardiganshire, iii. 336
  Cardinan, Robert de, i. 167, 168
  Cardinham, by Leland, iv. 278
  ―――― Robert de, iii. 7, 225. Lord of Fowey 27.――Isolda de, iv. 107.
    Richard de 62. Robert de 101 _ter._, 102 _bis_, 103. Family 62, 107
  ―――― parish, i. 60, 112, 124――iv. 184
  CARDINHAM parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, manor,
    founder of church, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    ancient state, i. 167. Pedigree of Cardinham and Denham, daring
    exploit of John Denham 168. Called to the peerage, chapel built by
    Lady Denham 170. Glynn 171. Devynock 172. By the Editor, etymology
    172. Glynn 173. Statistics 173. Geology by Dr. Boase 174
  Caregrin, by Leland, iv. 291
  Careswell, ii. 71
  Carew, the historian of Cornwall, i. 152, 178, 210, 241, 258, 324,
    325, 350, 390――ii. 38, 39, 45 _bis_, 62, 69, 93, 147, 157, 172
    _bis_, 173, 197, 203, 204, 205, 230, 237, 251, 260, 261, 294
    _bis_, 358, 384, 394 _quat._, 398, 409 _bis_, 410, 411, 414
    _ter._, 417, 418, 419――iii. 14, 24, 25, 28, 39, 61, 91, 103, 149
    _bis_, 150, 171, 179, 235, 268, 270 _bis_, 276, 279, 287, 291,
    302, 313, 316, 328, 355, 357 _bis_, 374, 388, 389, 392, 437, 438
    _quat._, 439 _bis_, 443, 451――iv. 7, 8, 15, 23 _bis_, 24 _bis_,
    41, 96 _ter._, 112, 113, 132, 134, 162.――His history of Cornwall,
    ii. 296.――His survey of Cornwall, i. 167, 171, 172, 199, 252, 253,
    258, 323, 341, 372, 383, 384, 386, 396――ii. 3, 5, 7, 12, 17, 36,
    41, 89 _bis_, 90, 93, 107, 108, 120, 130, 175 _bis_, 180 _bis_,
    184, 186, 235, 236, 260, 282, 299, 337, 342 _bis_――iii. 66, 79,
    81, 102, 104, 105, 111 _bis_, 125, 129 _bis_, 133 _quat._, 139,
    140 _bis_, 168, 190, 381, 393, 436, 437――iv. 21, 34, 74, 111, 139
  ―――― Alexander, i. 33 _bis_. Sir Alexander 34. Anne 37. John 33, 34.
    Sir John 33, 153. Sir Nicholas 33. Nicholas, Lord 170, 171 _bis_.
    Reginald Pole 37. Richard 33 _bis_. Richard 38. Sir Richard 34.
    William 34. Sir W. C. 37. Sir William 86. Mr. 347. Family 33.
    Pedigree 34. Etymology of name 34, 35.――Sir Edmund, ii. 189. Sir
    George, commander of the Mary Rose frigate 341. Sir Peter 195.
    Family 93, 229, 415.――Sir A. M.P. for Cornwall, and his death,
    iii. 40. John 191. Right Hon. R. P. 439, 440. Sir William 437.
    Miss 60.――Colonel, iv. 185
  Carew of Anthony, John the historian of Cornwall, John his son, and
    Richard, iii. 193.――Miss, iv. 101. Richard, his epitaph, with
    comments, App. 14. iv. 378
  ―――― of East Anthony, Sir Alexander, i. 352
  ―――― of Haccomb, Sir Henry, iii. 373
  ―――― of Harrabear, Jane, Thomas, i. 352
  ―――― of Penwame, i. 223, 416
  Carey, William, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 4, 271
  ―――― of Clovelly, Sir George, iv. 139
  Cargaul manor, i. 397
  Cargol manor, iii. 267, 268, 270. Account of 267
  Cargoll parish, i. 15, 246, 250, 396, 403――ii. 52
  Cargreen, bargemen of, ii. 375
  Carhayes, the Trevanians removed to, no park at, iii. 202. House
    described 452
  ―――― manor, iii. 451
  ―――― parish, iii. 448, 451 _ter._, 453 _quint._ Rector of 452
  ―――― or Carhays, i. 299.――The name, iv. 9
  Carike road, i. 26――ii. 1――iv. 72
  Carilepho, William, Bishop of Durham, i. 290
  Carinthia, law of, iii. 186
  Carisius, St. history of, i. 379
  Carlian, ii. 308 _bis_
  Carloogus castle, iv. 228
  Carlynike, account of, i. 255
  Carlyon, i. 44. Derivation and arms by Hals 54. By the Editor
    55.――Rev. P. of Mawgan, in Pyder, ii. 160. Family 286
  ―――― of Menagwins, i. 55
  Carlyon of Trengreene, Philip, Thos. _bis_, i. 55
  Carmailoc, ii. 203, 211
  Carmelite friars, i. 83
  ―――― nuns, iii. 150
  Carmellus, i. 83
  Carmenow, ii. 293
  ―――― family, ii. 127――iv. 3, 41. Arms 72
  ―――― Carminow, or Carmynow, Jane, iii. 200, 208. John 208. John, and
    his daughters 131, 132. Ralph 129. Ralph, his arms, and contest
    with Lord Scrope for them 129. Traced to the reign of Arthur 138.
    Distinction awarded him 131. Trial detailed 137. Displeased with
    the sentence 131. His motto 131, 138. Robert 129. Thomas 131. Sir
    Thomas 200, 208. William and William 131. Mr. 464. Family 117,
    129, 135, 200, 208, 423. Heir of 140. Their sepulchre 132. Ancient
    monuments 132, 138. Partition of property 423
  ―――― of Carmenow, John, and his daughter, iii. 133. Family 214, 419,
    421. Their heirs 419
  ―――― of Fengollan, or Fentongollan, i. 65.――John, ii. 109. Drove the
    French from Marazion 171
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 128
  Carminow, Philippa, Sir Roger _bis_. Sir Thomas, i. 241.――Family,
    ii. 354, 358
  ―――― of Boconnock, family and property, iv. 97
  ―――― of Fentongollan, John, iii. 132. John 211 _bis_. John 211.
    Oliver 211, 212. Thomas 211. The great Carminows 211
  ―――― of Menhynyet, iii. 168
  ―――― of Penkevil, John, his hospitality, iii. 214. Oliver 215.
    Thomas 214. Their house pulled down 215
  ―――― of Polmawgan in St. Winnow, iii. 212
  ―――― of Resprin, John, iii. 214
  ―――― of Trenouth, Nicholas, iii. 357
  ―――― manor, iii. 137. Etymology of 137
  Carmynew of Fentongollan, i. 116, 117 _bis_
  ―――― of Resprin 171
  Carn Galva, iii. 244
  Carnadon prior manor, iii. 440
  Carnan bridge, ii. 2
  ―――― creek, iii. 224
  ―――― river, ii. 24
  Carnanton in Pedyr manor, iii. 125, 152. Account of 143. Left to the
    Willyams family and improved 159
  Carnarthen in Illogan, ii. 250
  Carnbray by Leland, iv. 266
  Cambre, monument to Lord de Dunstanville upon, iii. 389
  Carnbrea, i. 165.
  Carndeaw, etymology of, ii. 335
  Carndew, or Camsew manor, account of, iii. 61
  Carne, Richard, i. 9, 10. Family 9. Pedigree and arms 10.――Joseph
    and William, characters of, iii. 95. Mr. 100. Family 94
  ―――― of Glamorganshire, iii. 269
  ―――― of Penzance, ii. 318
  ―――― Bray, account of, ii. 237. Chapel at, account of 283
  ―――― Bray castle, in Luggan, ii. 237, 239, 283, 284
  ―――― Breanic, i. 10. Geology 14. Position and height 15
  ―――― Buryanacht, i. 6
  ―――― Godolcan, by Leland, iv. 264
  ―――― Kye, ii. 237. Quantities of tin at 238 _bis_
  ―――― Mark, tumuli at, ii. 132
  Carnedde, i. 192
  Carnedon barton, iii. 459
  Carnen, ii. 17
  Carnesew, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Carneton, i. 209
  Carnhangives, by Leland, iv. 267
  Carnkie, i. 165――ii. 250
  Carnon branch of Falmouth harbour, iii. 304 _bis_
  Carnsew, ii. 94
  ―――― in Mabe, iii. 125
  ―――― family, ii. 94. Sir Richard and Grace his wife, her monument,
    iii. 66
  ―――― of Bokelly, iii. 61. William 61.――Derivation, ii. 337
  ―――― of Carnsew family, iii. 61.――In Mabe, ii. 335, 337. George 335.
    Sir Richard and two Williams, all sheriffs of Cornwall 335. Arms 337
  ―――― of Tregarne, Sir Richard, ii. 335
  ―――― of Treon, i. 136, 137. John 137. Thomas 136. Arms 136
  ―――― of Trewone, Henry, iii. 61
  ―――― manor, i. 136, 137
  Carock, St. monastery at St. Veep, prior of, iv. 110
  ―――― St. Pill, priory of, iv. 111
  Caroline, Queen, ii. 407
  Carpenter, Humphrey, jun. i. 303. J. P. 3. Rev. J. P. 204. William,
    shot at Skewis 269, 270 _bis_, 271 _quat._, 272 _quat._, 273
    _quint._, 274 _ter._, 275 _ter._ Family 302
  Carpenter of Mount Tavy, near Tavistock, ii. 400. J. P. 400,
    406.――John and Patience, iii. 301. Mr. 42.――Mr. iv. 45
  Carr, Lady Charlotte, iii. 172
  Carraton downs, account of, iii. 44
  ―――― hill, i. 196――ii. 154
  Carreth, account of, i. 298
  Carrow family and arms, i. 35
  Carsbroc, ii. 427
  Carshayes rectory, i. 72
  Carter, i. 223, 224. Honor 216. Richard 215.――Honour, iii. 237.
    Thomas of Dartmouth, Devon 315.――Colonel, iv. 189. Heirs of the
    family 111
  ―――― of St. Colomb, i. 222. John 223. Richard 222. Arms 223.――John,
    iii. 325 _bis_. Richard and family 325
  ―――― of Staffordshire, i. 222
  Carteret, Ralph de, ii. 209. Lord 348, 352. George Lord, married
    Grace, heiress of the Granvilles, Countess Granville 346.――Louisa,
    iii. 225. Lord Carteret 255, 256, 353.――Lord, iv. 16, 136
  Carthage, Scipio’s remark on its fall, ii. 426.――Destruction of,
    iii. 106.――Merchants of, iv. 168
  Carthagena, iii. 218
  Cartharmartha, account of, iii. 42
  Carthew, i. 260, 386, 393, 398
  ―――― copper mine at, ii. 256
  ―――― Thomas, ii. 255, 256. Mr. etymology of name and arms 255
  Cartuther, iii. 172
  Cartwright of Aynhoe, Northamptonshire, family, and W. R., M. P.
    iii. 152
  Carvaghe or Carvolghe, in Morvan and St. Tes, iii. 359
  Carvath, i. 49
  Carvean, iii. 355 _bis_. Etymology 364
  Carverth, account of, iii. 61
  ―――― Captain Henry, his history, ii. 94.――Gawan, iv. 77.――Mrs. iii.
    86. Mr. 88 _bis_. Family 61
  Carveth, or Carverth in Mabe, ii. 94――iii. 124
  ―――― O. A. i. 20.――Family of Thoms assumed the name, Thomas and
    arms, ii. 94.――John, iii. 82
  ―――― of Peransand, Anthony and his daughter, iii. 176. Family 187
  Carvinike, account of, i. 386
  Carvolgue manor, iii. 243
  Carwithinick, i. 241
  Cary, Henry, ii. 423
  ―――― of Clovelly, Devon, Mary, widow of Sir George, iii.
    269.――Family, i. 177
  ―――― Bollock or Bullock park, iv. 6, 7, 9. Account of 8
  ―――― of Cockington, Robert, i. 108
  Carynas, account of, i. 292
  Casa gigantas, i. 194
  Cassan, iii. 331
  Cassibelan, i. 10, 334
  Cassibelynn, ii. 3
  Cassiolus, Abbot, iii. 434
  Cassiter, ii. 2
  ―――― street, Bodmin, and its etymology, i. 79
  Cassiteridan islands, ii. 2
  Cassiterides, i 199
  Castell-an-Dinas, account of, i. 219, 228. Soil 230
  Castelle-an-Dinas, by Leland, iv. 262
  Castille, Alonzo and Frederick 2nd, kings of, i. 311
  Castle Caer Dane, iii. 322. Account of 319
  Castle Carne Bray, ii. 237, 239
  ―――― Cayle, iii. 342
  ―――― Chiowne, description of, iii. 244
  ―――― an-Dinas, account of, iii. 47.――or Dunes, iv. 53, 54. In St.
    Colomb 140
  ―――― Denis, i. 220
  ―――― Dore, iv. 102. Money found at in consequence of dreams 102
  ―――― hill, iv. 136
  ―――― Horneck, ii. 218. Near Penzance 285.――Account of, iii. 83
  ―――― Kaerkief, account of, iii. 320. Well in 322
  ―――― Keynock, ii. 187
  ―――― Killy Biry, or Killy Biny, account of, i. 372
  ―――― Kitty, i. 329
  ―――― Kynoek, i. 77, 88, 94
  ―――― Kynven, i. 329
  ―――― Terrible, ii. 420
  ―――― Treryn, iii. 31. Removing and replacing the rock 31
  ―――― Werre, account of, ii. 156
  Castledour, by Leland, iv. 279
  Castlemaine, Roger Palmer, earl of, husband of the Duchess of
    Cleveland, ii. 11. Appointed governor of Surat, ib.
  Castles after the Conquest, generally built of lime and stones, iv. 140
  ―――― in Cornwall, list of, iv. 228
  Castleton, Lawrence, Prior of St. Syriac’s, iv. 113
  Castletown, i. 261
  Cat eating the dolphin, i. 395
  Catacluse, stone of, iii. 178 _bis_
  ―――― Cliffs, pier at, iii. 179
  Catcher, William, iv. 77
  ―――― of St. Clements, John, iii. 327 _bis_
  Catchfrench, ii. 77 _bis_. Account of 68
  Catherine, queen of Charles the Second, iii. 148
  ―――― St. ii. 36. Her history 36. Her body found, its miraculous
    transportation, her wheel 37
  ――――’s St. ii. 41
  ――――’s St. chapel at Brightley in Kilkhampton, ii. 348
  ―――― St. chapel near Launceston, ii. 419
  Catholic church, general councils of, iv. 165
  Catholic clergy, i. 338
  Cattelyn, John de, i. 246
  Catullus, i. 183
  Catwater, iii. 108
  Cavaliers, song of the, ii. 278
  Cavall, i. 221
  ―――― Mr. arms, ii, Etymology, marriages of heirs, division of lands,
    ii. 335
  Cavedras, smelting-house at, ii. 317
  Cavendish, Lord George, ii. 326. Major, monument to 325
  Caweth of Caweth in Mabe, family and arms, ii. 337
  Cawsand, iii. 108
  ―――― bay, iii. 379
  ―――― village, iii. 379
  Caxton, i. 342
  Caxton’s, William, “Fructus temporum,” i. 338
  Cayl castle, by Leland, iv. 265
  Caynham church, in Ludlow, Salop, ii. 292
  Ceall Lidain, iii. 331
  Cecil, Sir Robert, ii. 9. William 213. Sir William, lord treasurer,
    married the daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke 16. Earl of Salisbury
    66. Robert, Earl of Salisbury 213
  Ceely family, i. 256.――Name changed to Silly, iii. 237
  Cell-Cester, i. 326
  Celt, a thunderbolt, iv. 32
  Celtic, i. 172, 342
  ―――― people, iii. 49
  Celts of Cornwall, their conversion, ii. 240
  Ceriseaux, _see Sergeaux_
  Chad, St. patron of Litchfield, Worcester, and Shrewsbury, ii. 391.
    His death 392. Summerhouse dedicated to 391. Inscription in it 392
  Chalk ridges in England, iii. 10
  Challons, of Challons-Leigh, Catherine and Robert, ii. 354
  Chamberlayne, heir of, ii. 109
  Chamberlyne, Lord, iii. 155
  Chambers, Mr. iii. 156
  Chamond, John, ii. 415. His monument 416. Sir John 414 _bis_.
    Richard, remarkable for long life, honours, and numerous relations
    414. Thomas and arms, ib. Residence 416. Family 357, 395 _bis_,
    416.――Family, iv. 18
  ―――― of Trewhythenick, i. 207
  Champernon of Intsworth family, ii. 251, 254. John 251 _bis_. Sir
    John 251. Richard 251 _bis_, 254. Arms 254
  ―――― of Madberie, Devon, Richard and Sir Richard, ii. 251
  Champernoun, William, iv. 102, 103
  Champernown, Jane, ii. 118. John 70 _bis_. Thomas 118. Family
    119.――iii. 47
  ―――― of Halewin, ii. 107
  Champernowne, i. 348
  ―――― Richard, i. 36. Family 293, 313.――Henry, iii. 294. William 276.
    Mr. 448. Heiress 294. Family 276――iv. 107, 127
  ―――― of Beer Ferries, i. 347
  ―――― of Clyst Champernowne, Devon, family and arms, ii. 254.
  ―――― of Darlington, Mr. iii. 8
  ―――― of Halwyn, arms, ii. 254
  ―――― of Porth Prior, ii. 65
  ―――― of North Taunton, near Modbury, arms, ii. 254
  ―――― of Umberleigh, near Modbury, arms, ib.
  Chancellor, Lord, i. 270 _bis_――ii. 52, 123――iii. 109――iv. 65.――Sir
    Thomas More, ii. 53.――Richard Lord Scrope, iii. 129
  Chancery court, ii. 52 _ter._, 53――iii. 228
  Chancery suits, ii. 120
  Chandois, Lord, ii. 223
  Chandos, Brook, Lord, ii. 32
  Channel, iv. 12
  Chapel, old British, at St. Ives, ii. 261
  ―――― Carne Bray, iii. 429
  ―――― Comb, i. 12
  ―――― an Crouse, iii. 312
  ―――― garden, iii. 147
  ―――― house, iii. 256
  ―――― Jane, iv. 164
  Chaplin, John, i. 214.――Miss, iii. 11
  Chapman, Edward, i. 237. Story of 238.――Edward, iii. 16
  Chappell Amble, account of, ii. 336
  Chappie, Sergeant, i. 270, 274
  Charlemagne, iii. 335
  Charles, John, iii. 346
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 21, 25, 27, 66, 71 _bis_, 213, 235, 258, 277,
    305, 333, 335, 344, 396, 404, 405, 410, 411――iii. 61, 81, 134,
    142, 144 _ter._, 146 _bis_, 151, 154, 157, 161, 183 _ter._, 199
    _bis_, 213, 243, 269, 303, 315, 318, 358 _bis_, 463――iv. 75 _bis_,
    107, 114, 119 _bis_, 152 _bis_, 156, 162, 172.――His bed-room at
    Cothele, i. 157.――Identified with the established church after the
    Restoration, ii. 20. Sir Beavill Grenville’s services to 343.
    Fired at 411. D’Israeli’s Life and Reign of 78.――At Leskeard, iii.
    20, 42. Entertained at Trecarrell 42. Drew up his forces on
    Carraton Downs 44. His lines in answer to Ben Jonson 146. Le
    Strange’s life of him 145.――A battle of his army near Stratton,
    iv. 13. His managers of affairs 14. Lord Sandys raised a regiment
    of foot and of horse for 58. Marched to Cornwall, quartered at
    Liskeard 185. Surprised a party at Lord Mohun’s house, made a
    proposal of peace 186. Battle with Essex 187. Parliamentary
    generals forced their way through his army, his troops stopped the
    roads, were driven back, he sent Captain Brett forward, and for
    his success knighted him on the spot 188. Granted a parley 189.
  Charles 2nd, King, ii. 3, 5, 8, 21 _bis_, 25, 28 _ter._, 38, 44, 51,
    52, 53, 54, 55, 95, 100, 142 _bis_, 158, 220 _bis_, 235, 277, 302,
    316, 333, 345, 346, 421.――iii. 76, 104, 116, 134, 135 _bis_, 148
    _bis_, 162 _ter._, 186, 201, 209, 212 _bis_, 250 _bis_, 274, 363,
    381, 460, 463, 464――iv. 14, 57, 75, 94, 102, 107, 157.――His
    restoration, and war with the French and Dutch, ii. 27. Peace with
    Holland, debt to Captain Penrose 29. Reproved by Mr. Killigrew,
    his jester 15. Fonder of him than of his best ministers 22
  Charles 2nd, ship, ii. 375.
  ―――― Prince, iii. 185, 363
  ―――― 5th, Emperor, i. 411.
  ―――― 8th, Emperor, bought the empires of Constantinople and
    Trebizond, ii. 368
  ―――― Martel, King of France, iv. 126
  Charlestown, i. 11, 48――iv. 104
  ―――― in South Carolina, attack upon, ii. 268. Ship nearly reached,
    driven back ib.
  Charleton, iii. 438.――Lieut.-colonel, iv. 186
  Charlotte, a story of, ii. 103
  ―――― Queen, i. 157
  Charlwoodia australis, iv. 181
  Charters, inviolability of, identified with liberty, i. 389
  Chasewater, ii. 304, 310, 317. Almost a town 308
  Chatham, William Pitt, Earl of, i. 69 _bis_. Obelisk to him 71
  Chattisham, Suffolk, ii. 149
  Cheapside, ii. 191
  Checkenock or Killignock, iv. 139
  Cheep, Captain, iii. 205
  Cheesewring, i. 184 _quin._, 178――iii. 45 _bis_.――Description of, i.
    185, 186 _bis_, 190, 193
  Cheiney family, iv. 43
  Chelsea, ii. 98
  Cheni, Robert de, ii. 119
  Cheny, i. 383
  Chersonesus, ii. 125
  Chester, iii. 109
  ―――― choir, dedicated to St. Walburg, iv. 125
  ―――― Miss, iv. 129
  Chevy Chase, ballad of, i. 240
  Cheyney, Charles, Viscount Newhaven, iii. 458. John 116.――John de,
    John, John, and John, iv. 43. Sir John and Sir John, both Speakers
    of the House of Commons 44. Ralph de, Robert de, and William de, one
    of them in the Crusades, arms 43
  Cheynoy in St. Endellyan, iv. 43
  Chiandower, ii. 84, 120, 124, 125. Etymology 125. Tin smelting-house
    at 82
  Chichester, ii. 292.――John Lake, Bishop of, iii. 296. One of the
    seven 299
  ―――― Charles, iii. 276
  Chilcot, i. 8, 323
  Chilcott, William, iii. 276
  Chiliworgy, i. 189
  China, ii. 290――iii. 183
  ―――― clay or stone in St. Stephen’s in Brannel, iii. 454, 455 _ter._
  Chinese wall, i. 189――iii. 289
  Chiowne, iii. 289
  Chippenham, i. 257
  Chiverton in Perran Zabuloe, iv. 90.――Account of, iii. 333
  ―――― Sir Richard, i. 314.――Richard and Miss, iii. 162
  Chiwidden, St. the first smelter of tin, iii. 330
  Cholwell, Mr. master of Wike St. Mary School, iv. 134
  Christ Church College, Oxford, iii. 296, 297 _bis_――iv. 86,
    95.――Rev. J. Bull, canon of, iii. 43.――Dean and chapter of, iv. 97
  Christian church divided by heresies, ii. 63
  ―――― festivals appointed for the days previously dedicated to pagan
    rites, ii. 288
  Christianitatus, Deanery of, Exon, ii. 319
  Christopher’s, St. iii. 183
  Chrysocoma cernua aurea, iv. 181
  Chrystallography, ii. 47
  Chubb, Egidius, iii. 153
  Chudleigh rectory, i. 130
  ―――― James, ii. 189, 190. John Sheriff of Devon 235.――General, iv.
    13 _bis_. Taken prisoner 15
  Chudley family, ii. 395
  Chulmleigh hundred, Devon, iv. 101
  Chun castle, i. 229 _bis_
  Church blown up, i. 215
  ―――― of England, iii. 298, 300
  ―――― lands confiscated, iii. 155
  ―――― tower at St. Enedor, fall of, i. 387
  Churches, the different uses of Roman Catholic and Protestant, iv. 103
  Churchill, Anne Duchess of Marlborough, i. 127. Lady Henrietta 234.
    Henrietta Duchess of Marlborough 126. John Duke of Marlborough
    126.――Charlotte, iii. 217
  Chydiock, coheir of, iii. 140
  Chyendur, iii. 324 _bis_
  Chyncoos, account of, ii. 316
  Chynoweth, i. 289. Account of 291
  ―――― of Chynoweth, i. 291. Arms 292.――Anthony, John and his three
    daughters, and Mrs. iii. 125. Arms 126
  Chyton, iii. 326
  Chywarton, iii. 324 _bis_. Account of 325
  Chywoon, ii. 104
  Cileintenat, Roger, iv. 27
  Cineraria populifolia, iv. 181
  Cinque ports, ii. 38
  Ciriac, Caricius or Cyret, St. iv. 112
  Cissa, King of the South Saxons, ii. 284
  Cistercian abbey, at Newenham, Devon, iii. 293
  ―――― or White Friars, i. 83
  Citrane, i. 162
  Civil war, iii. 92, 152, 158――iv. 75, 87, 96.――Havoc of, iii. 294.
    Part taken by Cornwall in 298
  Civil wars, ii. 387, 396, 410――iii. 183, 264, 274.――Trees at Tehiddy
    cut down in, ii. 240
  Clahar, iii. 258
  Clair, Clear, or Cleer, St. parish, iii. 13, 43, 45 _bis_, 260, 266, 371
  Clanricarde, Earl of, ii. 93
  Clare, Earl of, iii. 148. Hollis Earls of 147. John and Gilbert 148
  ―――― St. history of, i. 175. Elopes from her parents and becomes an
    abbess 176
  ―――― poor, nuns, i. 176
  Clare’s, St. well, description of, i. 177――ii. 315. Treasure
    supposed to be concealed and discovered there 316
  Claremont place, Brunswick-square, ii. 396
  Clarenbaldus, King’s chaplain, ii. 426
  Clarencieux the provincial herald, iii. 130, 131
  Clarendon, Earl of, iii. 200.――Advises the imprisonment of Sir
    Richard Grenville, gives an unamiable character of him, ii. 345. A
    partial historian 350
  Clarendon press, ii. 163――iii. 251
  ―――― province, Jamaica, ii. 120
  ――――’s History, i. 114
  ――――’s Rebellion, ii. 347
  Clares, nunnery of, at Truro, and their well at Edles in Kerrier,
    iv. 73
  ―――― poor, ii. 19. First brought to England 19. Nunnery of, at
    Liskeard 170
  Claret, receipt for making, ii. 186
  Clarke, i. 311 _bis_. Rev. J. E. 316.――Jeffrie, ii. 16. Mr. 162
  Classe, G. of Torrington, Devon, ii. 281
  Claude Lorraine, picture by, i. 195
  Clayton, Mary and Sir William, iv. 107
  Clear, St. Cape, iii. 6
  Cleare family, their arms, i. 177
  ―――― of Mertock, Robert, i. 177
  ―――― of Treworgy, i. 177
  Cleare, St. of Tudwell, i. 177
  Cleather family, i. 19, 198.――John sen., Samuel, and arms, iii. 325
  ―――― St. i. 308, 377
  ―――― parish, i. 1――ii. 36――iv. 61 _bis_, 63.――Rocks in, iii. 23
  CLEATHER, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    first fruits, incumbent, land tax, history of St. Cletus, i. 197.
    Basill, the Trevelyans 198. Foye Fenton 199. By Tonkin, Basill
    199. St. Eledred 200. By the Editor, Bordeny Abbey, story of Sir
    John Trevelyan 200. Statistics, vicar, and Geology by Dr. Boase 201
  Cleave house, iii. 256
  Cleder, i. 2
  Cleer, St. parish, i. 381, 413
  CLEER, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    first fruits, land tax, name, i. 174. Etomology, saint’s history,
    mendicant friars 175. St. Clare’s well, family of St. Clare,
    Treworgy, Conock, Tremabe, Treworock 177. Pennant, Wring-Cheese,
    the Hurlers, and the other halfstone, Dungerth’s monument from
    Camden 178. From Bond 179. From Polwhele 180. From Hals 181. Bond
    continued 182. Cheesewring 184. Gumbs house 184. Druidical basons
    186. Rock of white marble near Looe, Sharpy Torry 187. View from
    188. Extract from Ovid 189. Kilmarth Hill 189. Druids, from the
    Monthly Magazine 192. Etymology of Kilmarth, cromlech at Trethevic
    193. King Doniert, father of St. Ursula, story of Ursula and her
    nuns, Claude Lorraine’s picture of their embarkation 195. By the
    Editor, other monuments, King Doniert’s death 195. The Hurlers,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 196
  Cleer, St. town, i. 193
  Clement 5th, Pope, iii. 115
  ―――― 8th, Pope, anxious to reform the Greek Church, ii. 370
  ―――― St. Pope and Martyr, iii. 344.――His history, i. 206
  ―――― St. island and chapel, iii. 287
  ―――― St. parish, i. 393, 404
  CLEMENT, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, Condura, the Earl of Cornwall, i. 202. Caddock
    his son, Lambesso 203. Oliver King, ancestry of Samuel Foote,
    Penare 204. Tresimple Park, Polwhele 205. History of St. Clement
    206. By Tonkin, the Polwheles, Penhellick, Trewhythenick, Lambesso
    207. By the Editor, Polwhele, Rev. Charles Collins, Penhellick,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 208
  Clement’s, St. church, near Temple Bar, iii. 142
  ―――― parish, ii. 315, 318――iv. 70, 75, 80, 92――or Clemens, iii. 180,
    190, 354 _bis_
  ―――― street, Truro, has a church of its own, iv. 76
  Clements, Thomas, iii. 246 _bis_, 247 _ter._――Rev. D. of Warleggon,
    iv. 131
  Clemowe, Richard, iii. 387
  Clemsland or Climsland manor, account of, iii. 7
  Clerk, Henry, i. 213 _bis_. John 315. Paul 10.――Bernard, ii. 427.
    Sir George, his seat Pennycuick, county of Edinburgh 20
  Clether, St. parish, ii. 377 _bis_, 378
  Clethra arborea, iv. 181
  Cletus, Bishop of Rome, his history, i. 197
  Cleveland, Barbara, Duchess of, ii. _bis_.――Marquis of, i. 300
  Clicker Tor, ii. 79――iii. 172, 173 _bis_, 180
  Clickitor in Menheniot, iii. 373
  Clies family, iii. 83
  Clifford, Rosamond, i. 240.――Thomas, D. D. iii. 239
  Clifton, iii. 94. Near Bristol 251
  ―――― in Landulph, ii. 365, 371, 372――iv. 373 _quin._, 375. Account
    of 375
  Climerston, ii. 247
  Climsland Prior manor, iv. 9, 11
  Clinton barony, i. 151
  ―――― John 1st Lord, i. 151.――Arabella, ii. 313. General Sir Henry
    268. Lord 231 _bis_.――Margaret, heir of the Earl of Lincoln, iii.
    216. R. G. W. Trefusis, and C. Trefusis, Lords and Lady 230
  Clive, abbey of, Somersetshire, iii. 349, 350
  ―――― Colonel, ruined by a contested election, i. 390.――Family, iii. 94
  Cloak, iii. 222
  Cloake, Dr., iv. 74
  Cloberry, Mr. i. 381.――Miss, iii. 66
  ―――― of Carnedon family, iii. 459
  Clobery, Lucy, ii. 153
  ―――― of Bradstone, iii. 44
  Clode, Major, iii. 338
  Clodworthy, John, iii. 189
  Clome, popular prejudice against in Cornwall, i. 267
  Clopton, Hugh, iv. 134
  Clotworthy, i. 416
  Clowance, i. 266. Description of 288
  Clowberry, William, iii. 2
  Clowens, account of, i. 261
  Cluniac monks, iv. 111
  Clutterbuck, Captain, iii. 288
  Clyfton in Landulph, Theodore, Paleolagus died at, ii. 365
  Clymsland, ii. 429
  Clyse, John, iii. 83
  Coach, ancient, i. 358
  Coade, Edward, iv. 65
  Coalition ministry, i. 389.――Of Lord North and Mr. Fox, ii. 245
  Coat, Sarah, iii. 461
  Cobbeham, John de, iv. 153
  Cobham, Lord, i. 87.――Family, iii. 117.――John de, iv. 13
  Cobœa scandens, iv. 181
  Cock, William, i. 224. Family 234.――John and Robert, ii.
    160.――Anthony and John, iii. 382
  Cock’s kitchen, i. 165
  Cocke, Thomas, iii. 387
  Cocks, Anne, Charles, Lord Somers, Reginald, and family monument,
    iii. 229
  Code of St. Wen, John, iii. 325 _bis_
  Coffin, Rev. C. P. of Tamarton, iv. 42
  ―――― of Hexworthy, Richard, iii. 3
  ―――― of Portledge, Richard, and Miss, iii. 3.――Richard, iv. 40
  Coffyn, Miss, ii. 236
  Cohan, St. iii. 180
  ―――― Martyr parish, iii. 181
  Coill, King of Colchester, i. 237
  Coke, John, i. 20 _bis_
  ―――― of Tregaza, Christopher, i. 395. Thomas 394, 395, 396
  ―――― of Trerice, John, singular history of, i. 394. Arms 395, 396
  Colan parish, iii. 139, 275
  ――――, Little parish, i. 230――iii. 267
  COLAN parish, or Little Colan, by Hals, situation, boundaries, named
    from the Barton, ancient state, founder of church, impropriation
    and value of benefice, patron, rector, incumbent, land tax, family
    of Colon, i. 209. Coswarth 210. Cudjore 211. By Editor,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 212
  Colburn and Bentley, iii. 95
  Colchester, ii. 76
  Coldnell, John, Bishop of Salisbury, ii. 7
  Cole family, ii. 216, 217, 336. Captain Christopher 216. Captain
    Francis, R.N. 216, 217. John 123. Rev. John, D. D. and Samuel
    216.――Rev. Samuel, D.D. of Sithney, iii. 446. Rev. Mr. of Luxilian
    56. Mr. 66
  ―――― MSS. i. 300
  ―――― of Curtutholl, iii. 170
  ―――― of Devon, Philip, iii. 211, 215
  Coleridge, Rev. J. D. iii. 4
  Coleshill family, ii. 256.――Sir John, killed at Agincourt, his
    infant son heir of the family, iv. 16
  Colgan, iii. 434
  Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica, iv. 106
  Collectio spinosa, iv. 181
  Collet, Sir John, Lord Mayor of London, iv. 134
  Collier family, iii. 277.――Rev. Mr. of St. Tudy, iv. 95
  ―――― of Bosent family, iii. 348
  Collins, Edward, i. 403 _bis_. Rev. Edward 351, 352, 353, 366.
    Elizabeth 352. Rev. John 208, 353. Wrote a note to Steevens’s
    Shakpeare 353. John 403.――Rev. John of Redruth, ii. 243.――Edward,
    iii. 339. Rev. Edward, the Editor’s great grandfather, rector of
    Sithney, Phillack, and Gwithian 446. The poet 219
  Collins of Treworgan, in St. Erme, John, i. 353, 396. Arms
    396.――Edward, iii. 343. Family 343, 382
  ―――― of Treworgye, Edward, ii. 146, 147. Family 146
  ―――― of Truthan, Edward, iii. 165
  Colliton, Mr. iv. 23
  Collon, Little, i. 212
  Collquite or Killyquite, account of, iii. 65
  Collrun in Perran Zabuloe, iii. 319
  Collarian farm, account of, iii. 47
  Collwell, Thomas, ii. 120 _quater._ Family 120
  Collyar, i. 213
  Collyer family, i. 135.――Rev. Mr. ii. 92
  Collyns, Thomas, prior of Tywardreth, his correspondence with
    Cromwell, Vicar General to Henry 8th, iv. 105. Described 106. His
    election, and death 106
  Colmady of Longdon, ii. 137
  Colomb, St. parish, i. 56, 148, 211, 213, 215, 225, 250, 404――ii.
    67, 85, 113, 217, 253.――Or Columb, iii. 149, 160, 324, 395――iv. 53
  ―――― St. Lower, i. 209, 249――iii. 267
  ―――― Major, St. i. 115, 140, 161, 209, 230, 235, 392 _bis_, 407――ii.
    198――iii. 61, 139, 141, 142, 143, 161――iv. 2, 137, 140, 151
  COLOMB Major, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient
    state, i. 212. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    history and description of church, Arundel chapel 213. History of
    St. Colomba, Jesus chapel 214. Contest for its revenues 214.
    Church blown up 215. Subscription for its repair, pinnacle
    destroyed by lightning 216. Steeple, College of Black Monks 217.
    History of Bishop Arundell, four free chapels, weekly market 218.
    Fairs, Castle-an-Dinas, the Coyt 219. King Arthur’s stone,
    Retallock barrow, the nine maids 220. Truan, pedigree of Vivian
    221. Epitaph on Mrs. Vivian, pedigree of Carter 222. Trevithick,
    Trekyning, Nanswiddon 223. Tresuggan, Trekyninge Vean, Bespalfan
    chapel 225. By the Editor, the Saint, Nanswhyden, consumed by
    fire, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr. Boase, Fatwork mine,
    Manganese mine 227. Castle-an-Dinas by Borlase, tower built on the
    walls 228. By the Editor 229
  Colomb Minor, St. church, i. 74――iii. 177
  ―――― Minor, St. parish, i. 245, 251――iii. 269, 275
  COLOMB Minor, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    revenues impropriated, vicars stipend, patron, land tax, church well
    kept, i. 230. Trelvye, Ryalton 231. Mundy family 232. Penitentiaries
    233. Towan, Hendræ, Trevithick 234. By the Editor, Rialton, new
    quay, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr. Boase 235
  ―――― St. Porth, i. 235, 388
  ―――― St. rectory, i. 218
  ―――― St. tower, iv. 229
  ―――― or Columb, St. town, i. 218, 227――iii. 280――iv. 187. Road to
    Launceston from 46
  Colomba, St. i. 213
  Colomba’s St. day, i. 214
  Colon of Colon, i. 209, 210 _bis_. Jane, Margaret 209. Roger 209
    _bis_.
  Colon manor, i. 210
  ―――― manor, Little, account of, i. 209
  ―――― parish, i. 386
  Colquite, i. 262――ii. 180――iv. 22
  Colshill, i. 262
  ―――― of Tremada, John, i. 319 _quat._
  Colshul, of St. Ewe, i. 418. Sir John, _bis_, Joan 418
  Colshull, Joan and Sir John, iii. 316
  Colston family, iii. 95
  Colt, i. 220
  Coltdrynike, account of, ii. 67
  Columba, iii. 331
  Columbes, St. by Leland, iv. 261
  Colyn, Oto, iv. 127
  Comb Alan, ii. 402
  Combe, Barton, i. 132――iii. 181
  ―――― castle, by Leland, iv. 265
  ―――― Henry, iv. 90
  Comborne, i. 288――ii. 136 _bis_
  Come to good, ii. 35
  Come to good Sunday, ii. 35
  Common Pleas, Court of, in Cornwall, ii. 53
  Commons, House of, i. 390 _bis_, 355――ii. 66, 71, 75, 76, 95, 158,
    159 _bis_, 170.――Resolved not to sit on account of breach of
    privilege, i. 345.――Sir John Cheyney twice speaker of, iv. 44
  Comneni, imperial race of, ii. 366
  Comprigney, account of, ii. 318
  Conant, St. iii. 396, 397, 398 _bis_.
  ―――― or Gonnet’s park and meadow, iii. 396, 397
  ――――’s St. well, on Trefrank, iii. 393, 396
  Conanus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Condura or Condurus, Earl of Cornwall, i. 36, 202――ii. 320.――His
    history, i. 203
  Condura manor, ii. 320
  Conerton, ii. 260; or Connerton 145 _bis_
  ―――― manor, exchanged for St. James’s, iii. 140; or Connorton manor,
    account of, ii. 145, 147. Exchange of 145, 147, 148
  Connock, Mrs. iii. 20
  Conock of Treworgy, i. 177. John, etymology of name, arms ibid.
  ―――― of Wiltshire, i. 177
  Conor, etymology, i. 202
  ―――― Mr. master of Truro school, iv. 85
  Conorton of Lanherne, ii. 148
  Conqueror, i. 43――ii. 89――iii. 14, 142 _bis_, 264, 462――iv. 62. His
    death 71
  Conquest, ii. 70, 147, 238, 343――iii. 150, 226, 443――iv. 81 _bis_,
    140. Consort or West Lower hundred, i. 38
  Constans, the schismatic emperor, murderer of St. Martin, ii. 125
  Constantine, Emperor, i. 327. History of 237.――St. iii. 175, 178
  ―――― or Constanton parish, ii. 136――iii. 59, 74, 77, 124――iv. 2
  CONSTANTINE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, land tax, i. 236. Saint’s
    history, Trewardevi 237. Story of Mr. Chapman 238. Churches
    endowed by Constantine and other monarchs 240. Notice of Carmenow
    from Tonkin 241. By the Editor, Merther, Trewren, Carwithenick
    241. Chapels at Benalleck and Budeckvam, statistics, feast, vicar,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 242
  Constantine, St. church of, iii. 175, 178 _ter._ Font at 178 _bis_
  ―――― St. his festival, iii. 178, 179 _bis_
  ―――― St. well of, iii. 175
  Constantinople, ii. 368 _bis_, 370――iii. 187 _bis_――iv. 100, 101,
    148.――Arius bred at, ii. 63
  ―――― emperors of, calling themselves emperors of Rome, ii. 365. Last
    who reigned at, ib.
  ―――― empire of, gold to Charles 8th, ii. 368
  Constantius Chlorus, Emperor, i. 237 _ter._
  Constat of Bishops of Landaff, i. 382
  Convent, the first in Christendom, Franciscan, i. 81
  “Conveyancer, Noye’s,” iii. 154
  Conworthy, west, iii. 103
  Conybeare, Rev. J. E. i. 111
  Conyland, ii. 230
  Cood, ii. 320
  ―――― Michael, iii. 134
  ―――― of Pensimple, William, iii. 238
  Coode, Anne, iii. 248. John 143, 248. Richard 248. Miss 463. Family
    253. Heir of 361. Arms 249. Monuments to 253
  Cook, Mr. ii. 377
  Cooke, family, i. 18.――Sir Anthony, ii. 373. Sir Anthony of Giddy
    Hall, Essex 7, 15. His daughters learned, and their great marriages
    16. Katherine 7, 15. Oswald 423.――Dr., of London, iii. 187
  ―――― of Mevagissey, Joseph, and Paschas, i. 357
  ―――― of Treago, John, i. 248. Thomas 259
  ―――― of Tregussa, i. 142
  Cooper, Anthony Ashley, Earl of Shaftesbury, ii. 379. Bishop
    66.――Rev. Dr. Samuel, iii. 72
  Copgrave, i. 414, 415
  Copleston family, i. 347――iii. 276
  ―――― of Copleston, i. 347. John 104
  Coplestone family, ii. 292. The great 293, 294. Hereditary esquires
    of the white spur, and very rich 293. John tried for murder, and
    John his son, and arms 293
  ―――― of Colbrook, Devon, ii. 292
  ―――― of Warleigh, Christopher, iii. 250
  Copley, Sir Joseph, ii. 76
  ―――― of Bake family, iii. 252
  ―――― of Sprotborough, ii. 76
  Copper, seldom appears on the surface, but is mixed in tin lodes,
    ii. 134. Mode of selling in Cornwall 318. Veins and branches of
    native 360
  Copyholds, renewals of, iv. 54. Converted in Cornwall into leases
    for life, ib.
  Coran, account of, i. 419
  Corbean, i. 49
  Corbet, Anne, i. 36, 203. Catherine 296
  ―――― of Allenaster, co. Warwick, Anne, iii. 456, 463. Robert, her
    father 463
  ―――― of Shropshire family, iii. 404, 405
  Cordall, John, iii. 318 _bis_. John and Ralph 218
  Cordelier or Franciscan friars――_see Friars_
  Coren of Bullsworthy, John, iii. 3
  ―――― of Stephen’s family and arms, iii. 3
  ―――― St. ii. 113
  Corey, Rev. Richard, i. 377
  Corfe Castle, Henry Bankes M.P. for, iii. 221
  Corfu, ii. 368
  Corington, Sir John, his widow, i. 314
  Corinth reduced by the Turks, ii. 367
  Cork, i. 115
  ―――― county, iii. 331
  ―――― Edmund Boyle, Earl of, ii. 385
  Corker, Robert, of Falmouth, i. 399.――Mr. ii. 11.――Robert, iii. 444
  Corlyer of Tregrehan, Thomas, i. 259
  Cornall, Teek, iii. 287
  Cornavy, ancient name for Cornwall, iv. 39
  Cornburgh, Avery, iii. 405
  Cornehouse monastery, i. 407
  Cornelius, St. i. 244
  Cornelly parish, i. 300, 424 _bis_――ii. 356――iii. 182, 188, 189, 354
    _bis_
  CORNELLY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, consolidation
    with Probus, i. 242. Patron, incumbent, land tax, impropriation,
    ancient state, name in 1521, Tredenike 243. By Tonkin, etymology,
    Trewithenike 243. Saint 244. By Editor, Gregor family 244.
    Statistics, and Geology by Dr. Boase 245
  Corneth, John, ii. 375
  Cornish acre, ii. 89, 120
  ―――― antiquities, ii. 392
  ―――― Britons, King Athelstan’s victory over, iv. 40
  ―――― clergy ii. 89
  ―――― critics, their mistakes, iii. 320
  ―――― crown, iii. 451
  ―――― demesnes, iii. 451
  ―――― diocese, visitation of, iii. 456
  ―――― families educated at Truro school, iv. 85
  ―――― historian, ii. 95
  ―――― insurrection, iii. 387
  ―――― kings, iii. 451
  ―――― lawsuits, ii. 53
  ―――― men in Charles the second’s service, ii. 29
  ―――― minerals, Mr. Williams’s fine collection of, ii. 134
  ―――― miners, iii. 229.――Marched against the combined fleet, ii. 245
  ―――― names, App. 9, iv. 312 to 318
  ―――― office for administration of the sacrament, ii. 31
  ―――― people, their insurrection against Henry 8th, ii. 192
  ―――― proverbs, i. 354, 368
  ―――― rebels, ii. 186. King answers their demands 195
  ―――― see, i. 116
  ―――― tinners, iv. 167
  ―――― tongue spoken late, ii. 31 Scawen’s dissertation upon, iv. 193
    to 221
  ―――― trials, ii. 53
  ―――― vocabulary, iv. 39
  ―――― Wonder Gatherer, ii. 173――iii. 392
  ―――― works translated, iii. 288
  ―――― family, i. 10.――Rev. G. J. ii. 309. William 216. Elizabeth,
    lived to a hundred and thirteen, iv. 17
  ―――― of Trevorike, William, ii. 255 _bis_. Miss 255. Mr. 256
  Cornmarth, ii. 133
  Cornua ammonis, plentiful at Keynsham near Bath, ii. 297
  Cornwall, Archdeacon of, William de Augo, ii. 426
  ―――― archdeaconry, iii. 460
  ―――― assizes, i. 173.――Held at Launceston, ii. 422
  ―――― Bishop of, i. 18.――ii. 54, 299 _bis_. Berwoldus 60. Suffragan
    to the diocese of Exeter at St. German 72.――Bishops, iii. 415
  ―――― bishopric of, i. 96. 231.――ii. 95――iii. 456
  ―――― cathedral of, i. 73.――Mr. Whitaker’s discussion upon, iii. 408
  ―――― county, i. 327, 328, 334――ii. 19――iv. 48, 49.――Afield of
    political speculation, i. 69. Encroachment of the sea on its
    coasts 60. Rebellions in 86, 88.――The back door of rebellion, ii.
    186. Mr. Rashleigh the first collector of minerals in 47. Recent
    histories of 47. Smallest parish in 49. Judge Dolben a happiness
    to 52. St. German in 65 _bis_. Parochial history of 66. Ancient
    mining of 82. Romantic scenery of 88. Dunstone prevalent in 88.
    Service on the King’s coming into 89. First boarding school for
    ladies in 91. Inundation of sand buried the northern parts of 149.
    Rebels made prisoners in 197. Executed 198. Seven Saxon Kings
    dined together in 284. A petrifier of serpents wanted in 292.
    Fragmentary rocks in 330. Blessings proclaimed to the builders of
    Bideford bridge in all the churches of 341. Contributed to by most
    families of note in 341. Successful royal campaign in 345.
    Gentlemen’s seats in, embellished from Stowe 351. Gold found in
    354. Inaccessible situation of 386. Select vestry in all large
    parishes of 388. Part taken in civil war by 396. Lan used as a
    prefix in 424. Launceston the capital of 431. Hills and bad roads
    of 431.――Relics of antiquity in, iii. 52. Vallies in, heaps of
    rubbish 59. Medicinal waters of 79. No vicarage churches in 114.
    Granite in 432. Devon dismembered from 104, 462. Unsettled state
    of 246. First great iron works in 305. The west of, reduced by
    Athelstan 322. Prince Charles in 363. St Sennan came to 431 _bis_.
    Error of some writers upon 6.――Alien priories in, iv. 101.
    Earthworks in 126. Settlement of the Saxons in 125. Many
    gentlemen’s sons of, educated at Wike St. Mary’s school 134. The
    Northern entrance into, was formerly by Stratton 16. Trevalga in
    the most desolate part of 67. London architecture reaching to 81.
    Copper ores of, purchased by Mr. Coster 89. Truro the first town
    in 85. Essex and his army entered, iv. 185
  ―――― Custos Rotulorum of, Lord Robarts, ii. 379
  ―――― Geological Society of, ii. 291――iii. 424――iv. 122
  ―――― History of, Mr. Fortescue Hitchens assisted in compiling, ii. 224
  ―――― hundreds of, account of them, App. 13, iv. 317
  ―――― Lords Lieutenant of, Earl of Radnor, ii. 380.――Two Earls of
    Mountedgecumbe, iii. 107
  ―――― members of parliament for, ii. 351 _ter._ Sir John Eliot 71.
    Sir William Lemon 85.――Francis Basset, iii. 229. Admiral Boscawen
    219. Hugh Boscawen 40. James Buller 249. Sir A. Carew 40. Sir
    William de Ferrers 165. Sir B. Granville 40. Sir William Lemon
    229, 249. E. W. W. Pendarves 367. Mr. Praed 9. Thomas de Prideaux
    56. Sir Thomas Sereod 165. Nicholas Trefusis 40. Sir W. L. S.
    Trelawny 301. John Trevanian 200, 201, 204. His letter 204. Sir
    Richard Vyvyan 136. Sir R. R. Vyvyan 137.――Francis Gregor, iv. 89.
    John de Tynten 96
  ―――― militia, iv. 37.――Charles Phillips, Lieut.-col. of, ii. 399.
    Jonathan Phillips, Captain in 399.――Mr. Williams, Colonel of, iii
    159.――Charles Phillips, Lieut.-col. of, iv. 45. Henry Thompson,
    Captain in 109
  ―――― sheriffs of, ii. 47, 68. Basset 235 _ter._, 304, 394, 395.
    Carnesew 186, 335 _ter._ Chamond 414 _quater._ Champernon 251.
    John Enys 97. Grenvill 341 _quater._ William Harris 139. Orchard
    343. Treffry 43 _ter._――Mr. Amy, iii. 235. Thomas Le Archideakene
    405. Arundell Sir John 141, 274. Sir J. 213. Renfry and Renfry
    141. Humphrey Borlase 238, 268. Hugh Boscawen 213. Buller Sir
    Francis 463. John 249. Richard and Sir Richard 463. Carmenow John
    132, 133. Ralph 129. John and J. T. Coryton 346. Stephen Durnford
    374. Peter, Sir Peter, Richard, Richard and Sir Richard Edgecumbe
    104. John Eliot 337. George Herisey 417. James 419. Richard 417.
    Richard Gedy 337. Edward Herle 41. John de Mawgan 148. Erasmus
    Pascoe 343 Richard Penrose 444. Gregory Peter 176. Mr. Popham 446.
    R. Prideaux 56. Thomas Rawlings 280. John, and Sir John Reskymer
    133. Sir John 147. Hugh Rogers 445. Sir Richard Sergeaulx 65. John
    de Tregaga 211. John Tremayne 101. Charles, Sir Charles, Hugh,
    Hugh, Hugh, William, Sir William, and Sir Wm. Trevanian 199.
    Walter de Treworther 269. Francis, Hanniball, Michael, Richard,
    and Richard Vyvyan 134. John, Thomas, and Thomas Walesbury 116.
    John Worth 62
  Cornwall county, standard of, iii. 332
  ―――― Carew’s survey of, index to, iv. 381
  ―――― duchy, i. 3――ii. 87, 155, 375, 404――iii. 14, 15, 26 _bis_, 28,
    57, 286――iv. 6, 9, 14, 127, 186.――A manor annexed to, ii.
    46.――Robert Corke, receiver of, iii. 444. Holdings 286.――Manor, iv. 6
  ―――― Duke of, i. 75, 202, 253, 323, 413――ii. 145, 229, 230, 309,
    365, 376, 401, 402――iii. 24, 28, 44, 64 _ter._, 81, 223, 328,
    349――iv. 7, 8, 61, 71, 125. His lands 186. Edward I. 296. Prince
    Edward 339.――Edward the Black Prince, ii. 422――iv. 71. Frederick
    Prince of Wales, ii. 84. Solomon, a Christian 338. William 408.
    Edward the Black Prince, iv. 71
  ―――― Dukes of, iii. 14, 15, 24――iv. 72.――Their Exchequer Hall, iii.
    26.――Had a castle at Helstone, ii. 402. List of them from the time
    of Edward III. i. 373
  ―――― Duke and Earl of, i. 318――iv. 7, 8, 78
  ―――― Earl of, i. 151, 153, 202, 318, 322, 323――iii. 448, 462.――His
    castle at Truro, now in ruins, iv. 76.――Ailmer, i. 73. Algar 73,
    74, 94 _bis_, 95. Caddock 203, 254. His history and arms 203.
    Condur 254. Condura 36, 202. Cradock 36. Edmund Plantagenet 253,
    254. John 296 _bis_. John of Elham 256, 339, 341. Piers Gaveston
    338. Reginald 36. Richard 36, 340.――Robert 402. Edmund, ii. 138.
    Prince John, his treason 177. Protected Pomeroy 178. Reginald 420,
    428. Richard 109, 138, 403, 422. Richard Plantaganet 155. Richard,
    King of the Romans 8, 156. Robert 418. Roger 128. William
    418.――Ailmer, iii. 462. Algar 462. Cadock 82, 462 _bis_. Agnes or
    Beatrix, his daughter 463. Condura 462. Edmund 15, 26, 27. Son of
    Richard King of the Romans 285. Edward of Caernarvon 302 _bis_.
    John 27. King 448. Reginald 353. Richard 14, 15, 26, 27, 47, 268,
    350. King of the Romans, &c. 15, 19, 28, 169, 268, 285, 448 _bis_.
    A promoter of monastic establishments 285. Robert 14, 27, 44. Earl
    of Morton, &c. 291, 345, 349, 352, 451 _bis_. Robert Guelam, Earl
    of Morton, &c. 462.――Edmund, iv. 4. His history 368. Gothlois 94.
    John 71 _bis_. Of Eltham, his history 371. Succeeded to the crown
    71. Reginazd 169. Incorporated Truro 77. His history 353. Richard
    26, 27, 41. His history 356. Robert Earl of Morton, &c. 15, 67,
    102, 118. Roger 41. William Earl of Morton, &c. 100, 111
  ―――― Earls of, ii. 38, 145, 257 _bis_, 259, 260, 384, 422――iii.
    79, 168, 442, 448, 452, 456――iv. 6.――Held their court at Tintagell
    castle, ii. 402.――Their history, app. 12. Before the Conquest, iv.
    346 to 348. After the Conquest 348 to 373
  ―――― Earls of, Norman, iv. 81
  ―――― Earldom of, ii. 156, 379, 384――iii. 22, 452.――Raised to a
    Dukedom, ii. 155. Lost its feudal sovereignty 392
  ―――― King or Earl of, i. 322, 323
  ―――― Kings of, iii. 326, 452
  ―――― Prince of, i. 327
  ―――― Princes of, ii. 158――iii. 13
  ―――― Launceston Castle, their seat, ii. 418
  ―――― See of, reasons for removing, iii. 416
  ―――― sovereigns of, iii. 365
  ―――― Geffery, iii. 449. Joan 448. John 318. Sir John 27. Richard de
    448. William 449. Family 198
  Cornwall, of Burford in Shropshire, family, iii. 449
  Coronilla glauca, iv. 181
  ―――― valentina, iv. 181
  Corpus Christi College, Oxford, iii. 406
  Corrack road, ii. 281. Account of 284
  Corringdon, Rev. Mr. ii. 340
  Corsican gold, iv. 33
  Cortyder, by Leland, iv. 280
  Corvith, in St. Cuby, iii. 362
  Cory, Rev. W. ii. 364
  Coryton family, i. 410――ii. 32――iv. 130. Johanna, iii. 166. John
    346. Sir John 164, 165 _bis_, 266, 345, 346. John. T., 346 _bis_,
    348. Built a fine house 166. Family 161, 165, 346. Name 165
  ―――― of Crockadon, John, i. 315
  ―――― of Newton family, i. 315.――John, ii. 231. William 305.――Anne
    and Catherine, iii. 162. Sir John 162 _ter._, 176. Sir John’s widow
    163. William and Sir William 162. Family 161. Arms 162.――Sir John,
    iv. 9
  ―――― of Pentillie, Mr. iii. 372.――Of Pentilly, J. T. i. 316
  Cosawis, or Gosose, ii. 100
  Cosens, Nicholas, Sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 317. Family 319
  Cosowarth, Miss, i. 387
  ―――― Bridget, Sir Samuel, and Nicholas, iii. 135. Miss 116. The
    estates passed to Vyvyan 135
  ―――― of Nanswhiddon, i. 387
  ―――― of Penwarne family and heir, iii. 191
  Cossa, i. 326
  Cossens, i. 313
  Coster, Mr. of Bristol, i. 226.――A coppersmith there, took Mr. Lemon
    into partnership, iv. 89
  Coswarth, i. 210. Account of 211
  ―――― Bridget and Sir Samuel, i. 222. Arms 211
  ―――― of Coswarth, Bridget, i. 211. Dorothy 210. Edward 211 _bis_.
    John 210 _bis_. John 211 _quat._ Nicholas, _bis_, Robert, _ter._
    Samuel, Sir Samuel, _bis_, 211. Samuel 212. Thomas 211
  Coswin, account of, ii. 142
  Cosworth, Miss and Mr. iii. 193
  Coswyn de, John, and family, ii. 142
  Cotehele, i. 154, 158 _bis_, 159――ii. 108, 115.――View of  the Chapel
    at, i. 156.――Thick woods about, iii. 102
  ―――― de Cotehele, Hilaria and William, i. 154
  Cotele, iv. 70
  Cotland, ii. 71
  Cottell of Alderscombe, Alexander, and family, ii. 351. Arms 352
  Cotterell’s dispute with Le Grice for the lands of the latter, ii. 277
  Cottey, Christopher, and Mr. iii. 327
  Cottle, Alexander, and his father, iii. 116
  Cotton, William, i. 141. William, F. S. A. 228.――Sir John, iii. 235
    _bis_, 237. His sister 237. William 233, 244. William, Bishop of
    Exeter 233. William, son of the Bishop 234, 235. Family and their
    monuments 233.――Family, iv. 45, 62
  ―――― MSS. 154
  Couch, Reginald, ii. 90
  Coulson, Henry, and Rev. T. H. ii. 359
  ―――― Rev. H. T. of Ruan Major, iii. 420
  Coumb, St. Lower, parish, iii. 139
  Coumbe village, iii. 255
  Council, general, of the British clergy, at St. Alban’s, ii. 64
  Councils, ecclesiastical, i. 100 _ter._
  Court barton, iii. 448 _bis_――ii. 395, 396
  ―――― in Lanreath, ii. 394
  ―――― in St. Stephen’s, the Tregarthyns removed to, ii. 109
  ―――― of chivalry, iii. 129
  ―――― leet at Helston, ii. 145.――Of Ryalton, i. 231 _bis_
  ―――― manor, ii. 110
  ―――― roll, tenure by copy of, ii. 51
  ―――― rolls, iii. 234.――Of a manor for three centuries, in
    possession of the editor, iv. 54
  Courtenay, Sir Edward, i. 33. Elizabeth, Florence, and Isabel 65.
    Jane 33. Maud 65. Peter, Bishop of Exeter 373.――Kelland, ii. 353,
    354, 384. Richard and Thomasine 386. Walter 189. William, sheriff
    of Devon 235. Lord William and Sir William 189. Family 354, 362,
    375.――George, iii. 214. Archbishop 171 _bis_. Monument to a 439.
    Family 373, 437.――Nicholas, iv. 112. Lawrence 113. Family 41, 97.
    A branch of at Treveryan 109. Arms 96
  Courtenay of St. Benet’s, Henry, i. 113.――In Lanyvet, Henry, iv. 188
  ―――― of Boconock, Edward, i. 43. Of Boconock and Haccomb, Emelyn,
    and Sir Hugh 64
  ―――― Earls of Devon, Edward, i. 63, 64 _quat._――Edward 11th Earl,
    iii. 436. Edward 12th Earl 437 _ter._ Edward 16th Earl 64, 65
    _bis_.――Hugh, i. 63.――Thomas, and Thomas his successor, iii.
    350.――William, i. 64
  ―――― Henry Marquis of Exeter, i. 43, 64――ii. 375
  ―――― of Haccomb, Sir Hugh and Margaret, i. 262.――Sir Hugh, iii. 437
    _bis_
  ―――― of Moland, Elizabeth and Sir Philip, i. 64
  ―――― of Powderham, i. 411
  ―――― of Tremere family, ii. 385, 387. Charles and Humphrey 385.
    Kelland 385 _bis_. William, ib.
  ―――― of Trethurfe family, Sir Peter and William, ii. 385――or
    Trethyrfe, i. 65――iii. 133
  ―――― i. 171, 177――ii. 292
  ―――― of Boconnock, iv. 157
  ―――― of Penkivell, ii. 54
  ―――― of Trehane, William, i. 397――ii. 130
  ―――― of Tremeer, i. 396――iii. 187
  ―――― of Trethurfe, i. 397
  Courts of Westminster, Cornwall remote from, ii. 145
  Covent Garden theatre, Mr. Dagge manager of, ii. 34
  Coventry, Lady Anne, i. 37.――Henry, iii. 252
  Coverack, ii. 331 _quater._ Noted for a lucrative trade 324
  ―――― cove, a transport lost in, ii. 325
  ―――― pier, ii. 331
  Covin, i. 205
  Cowley contrasted with Killigrew, ii. 22
  Cowling, John, and his daughter, iii. 288
  Cowlins of Kerthen, i. 266
  Coysgarne, iii. 326
  Coyt, in St. Colomb, account of, i. 219
  Coytfala, now Grampound, i. 353
  Coytpale, i. 257
  Cozens, or Cosens, William, iv. 77
  Crackington cove, ii. 88
  Cradock Earl of Cornwall, i. 36
  Craggs, Harriet; and James, Secretary of State, ii. 75
  Craig Vrance, ii. 305
  Crane, i. 162, 164.――In Cambume, ii. 123
  ―――― of Crane, Richard, family and arms, iii. 387
  Crantock church, i. 74, 248, 250
  ―――― college, i. 247, 250
  ―――― parish, i. 230, 249, 289, 293――iii. 267, 343
  CRANTOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 245.
    Ancient state and revenues, impropriation, vicar’s stipend, patron,
    incumbent, land tax 246. Consecrated well, name of church, Treganell
    247. Treago 248. Gannell creek, Tremporth bridge 249. By Tonkin,
    saint’s name, impropriation, incumbent. By the Editor, collegiate
    church 250. Statistics, feast, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 251
  Crantoke, by Leland, iv. 285
  Crawley, Judge, iii. 144
  Creation, i. 260
  “Creation of the World,” Mr. Keigwyn’s translation published by
    Editor, iii. 329
  ―――― and “Flood,” i. 109.――Translated, iii. 288
  Crediton, Devon, ii. 69――iii. 248, 415.――St. Boniface born at, iv. 126
  ―――― Leofric, Bishop of, iii. 416. Livingus, Bishop of 415
  ―――― see of, iii. 415
  ―――― college, iii. 7
  Credys in Padstow, not noticed in Tanner, ii. 388
  Creed, Apostles’, in Cornish, i. 252, 260
  ―――― church, i. 258
  ―――― parish, i. 140, 300, 424――ii. 90――iii. 170, 195, 198, 354, 371,
    448, 450, 451
  CREED parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 251.
    Apostles’ creed in Cornish 252. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, Tybesta, Grampound borough, privileges 253.
    Fairs and market, chief inhabitants, Trevelick, Tencreek 254.
    Pennans, Nantellan, Carlynike 255. Nancar 256. By Tonkin,
    Trencreek, Granpont, ib. Trevellick, Trewinnow, Pennance 257.
    Trigantan, the church 258. By the Editor, Tybesta and Grampound
    ibid. Hawkin’s family 259. Differences of the Cornish creeds,
    statistics, vicar 260
  ―――― rectory house, i. 258
  Creeg meer, account of, iii. 319
  Cregoe, account of, i. 297
  ―――― i. 205. Rev. John 424.――Edward, ii. 54. M. G. 58
  Cremble passage, iii. 105
  Cressy, battle of, iv. 72
  Crewe, Rev. Mr. ii. 86.――Elizabeth-Anne and John, iii. 220. Mr. 185, 211
  Crewenna, St. i. 263
  Crews, Rev. Mr. i. 253
  Crewys, Sir Alexander, i. 347. Mr. of Lesnewith, iii. 22. Mr. 276
  Cricklade, i. 258
  Criticism, &c. letters on, ii. 76
  Croaker of Crogith, i. 299
  Croan, i. 371. Account of 376
  Crocadon, account of, iii. 162
  Crockaddon, account of, i. 313, 316
  Crocker, Michael, i. 8
  ―――― of St. Agnes, Miss, iii. 80
  Croftilborow, iii. 439
  Croftshole, iii. 439 _bis_
  Crogith, account of, i. 299
  Croker, Sir John, ii. 189. Robert 337, 338
  Cromlech at Trethevye, i. 193
  Cromleigh at Lanyon, iii. 89
  ―――― at Malfra, iii. 90
  ―――― in Morva parish, iii. 90, 244
  ―――― in Zennor parish, iii. 90
  Cromleighs, description of them, iii. 90
  Cromwell, Oliver, i. 204――iii. 186, 188, 381.――Curious letter from,
    ii. 47.――His interregnum, i. 204――ii. 277――iii. 421, 449.――His wars
    with Charles 1st and 2nd, iv. 75.――Richard, iii. 188.――Thomas, his
    correspondence with the prior of Tywardreth, iv. 105. Described 106
  Crook, Judge, iii. 144
  Croome family, iii. 192
  Cross family, ii. 252, 397
  ―――― of Bromfield, Somerset, Mary and Richard, iii. 315
  ―――― posts, establishment of, i. 56. Farmed by Mr. Allen 57
  Crosses on moor stones, i. 195
  Crossman, ii. 54
  Crosstown village, iii. 255
  Crostetedon, i. 236
  Crowan parish, i. 118, 160, 355――ii. 122, 139, 141 _bis_, 144,
    272――iii. 7, 65, 384, 389, 441, 442
  CROWAN parish, by Hals, boundaries, ancient state, value of
    benefice, patronage, rector, incumbent, land tax, endowment,
    Clowens, pedigree of Seynt Aubyn, i. 261, Tregeare, by Tonkin,
    etymology 263. Tregeare, Hellegan, Clowance 264. By the Editor,
    patronage of the church, oversight of Hals, Sir John Seynt Aubyn,
    Lady Seynt Aubyn’s marriage portion 265. Stoke Damarel, Devonport,
    advowson, by Lysons, Kerthen 266. Shewis, Henry Rogers’s
    resistance of the sheriffs, fatal consequences 268. His escape,
    arrest, trial 269. Evidence 270. Lord Hardwicke’s charge 278.
    Proclamation 279. His son’s account 280. His death 282. Sir John
    Seynt Aubyn’s letter on the occasion 284. Monuments in the church,
    chapel of ease, charity school, statistics, feast, vicar, Geology
    by Dr. Boase, celebrated for mines, beauty of Clowance 288
  Crown demesnes, iii. 365
  ―――― patronage, ii. 231――iii. 222, 223, 253, 284, 349――iv. 40, 97,
    127, 137, 160. Let 40
  ―――― “Noye’s Rights of,” iii. 154
  Crudge, Adry, i. 357
  Cruetheke, iii. 372
  Cruff of Borew, i. 421
  Crystalline rocks in Linkinhorne, iii. 45
  Cubert church, i. 74
  ―――― parish, iii. 39, 275, 333
  Cuby parish, i. 413――ii. 2――iii. 354, 371, 402, 403, 451.――St. iv. 117
  CUBY, St. parish, or Tregony, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    antiquity, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, history
    of the saint, i. 294. His shrine, privileges of the borough 295.
    Castle, arms of the borough, family of Pomeroy 296. Crego 297.
    Attempts of Mr. Trevanion to render the river Val navigable,
    Carreth 298. Hospital 299. By Tonkin, Crogith, bridge, ruins of
    the old town, and of St. James’s church, its patron 299. By the
    Editor, ancient town, castle, and priory 299. Statistics, vicar,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 300
  Cudan Beke, i. 32
  Cudanwoord, ii. 59
  Cudden Point, iii. 311 _ter._, 375. Curious custom at 311
  Cuddenbeck, ii. 68
  ―――― borough, ii. 69
  Cudjore, account of, i. 211
  Cudworth, Mr. iv. 94
  Culloden, victory of, caused the fall of the Whigs, ii. 244
  Cumberland, i. 289――iii. 246
  Cuming, Alexander, iii. 445
  Cummin, Rev. Mr. ii. 398
  Camming, Sir Alexander, and Mr. iii. 9
  Curgenven, Captain and Mrs. iv. 4
  Curgurven, Rev. William, iii. 357 Curlyghon or Curlyon, ii. 155.
    Account of 301
  ―――― family, ii. 301
  Curlyon family, descendants of Richard, i. 54
  Curnow, John, iii. 343 _ter._ and three daughters 343. Family 54,
    343.――John, iv. 55
  Curran Boake, ii. 61
  Currie or Karentocus, St. church iv. 12
  Curthop, i. 298
  Curthorp, i. 298
  Curtutholl, account of, iii. 170
  Curvoza, account of, iii. 362
  Cury parish, i. 118, 356――ii. 80, 126 _bis_――iii. 110, 127, 128,
    257, 416, 419
  CURY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, ancient state, family of Bochym,
    Arundell’s rebellion, i. 301. Family of Bellot, Bonython 302.
    Bochym, Shewis 303. By Editor, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 304
  Custendon, i. 236
  Custom house establishment at St. Ives, ii. 261.――At Truro, iv. 74
  Customs, laws of, iii. 423.――Mr. Lamb, collector of, at Fowey, ii.
    47――and excise, laws of, iv. 175
  Cuthbert, St. his history, i. 289.――Bishop of Lindisfarne, iv. 42
  ―――― St. parish, i. 215, 254――iii. 267, 313
  CUTHBERT, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient state, value of benefice, patron, rector, land tax,
    saint’s history, i. 289. Translation of his relics and the
    bishopric from Lindisfarne to Durham 290. Holywell, Chynoweth 291.
    Carynas 292. By Tonkin, plague, holy well 292. Hallanclose,
    church, Kelsey 293. By the Editor, statistics, feast, vicar,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 293
  Cuthill, i. 154
  Cutler, Sir John and Mary, ii. 380
  Cyric, St. the monk of, iv. 114
  Cyric’s, St. creek, iv. 113

  Dacia, i. 336
  Daddoe, Rev. J. of Merthyr, iii. 189
  Dagge, Mr. possessor of Killigarreen; and Mr. and his brother,
    manager of Covent-garden theatre, ii. 34
  Dal, monastery at, ii. 90. St. Sampson’s remains enshrined there 90
  D’Albert, Sir Perdiccas, ii. 176
  Dalbier, a parliamentary general, iv. 186 _bis_
  Dallaway’s Chichester, iii. 205
  D’Alneto family, ii. 375
  Dameliock castle, i. 328 _bis_, 329 _bis_, 330 _ter._, 331 _ter._,
    332――iv. 94.――Siege of by King Uter, i. 329
  Damelsa castle, iv. 140
  ―――― house, iv. 140
  Damerell, Sir John, iii. 60. Arms 61
  Damholt, Lord, French Admiral, ii. 342
  Danaus, his daughters, iii. 265
  Dance Meyns, i. 141 _bis_
  Dandy family, ii. 397
  ―――― of Trewenn, William, i. 326
  Danell, i. 383
  Danes, i. 290――ii. 27――iii. 262, 365――iv. 140. Burn Bodmin, ii. 60.
    Bishop Stidio’s loss by 61. Arrived in West Wales (perhaps
    Cornwall), and defeated on Hengiston downs 310. Probably buried in
    the three barrows 317. Their castles 423.――Destroyed Nutcell
    abbey, iv. 126
  D’Angers of Carclew, Isabella, iii. 225 _bis_. James 225. Margaret
    225 _bis_. Richard 225. Family 224. Arms 226
  Daniel, Nicholas, i. 375.――Richard, iv. 77.――Family, i. 434
  Daniell, Thomas, i. 58――R. A. ii. 33 _bis_, 318. Successful in
    mining 33. Thomas 33 _bis_. Built a house at Truro of Bath stone
    33. Member for West Looe 34. Samuel, his Chronicle 284.――Mr.
    succeeded Mr. Lemon, married Miss Elliot, iv. 89
  Daniell’s Chronicle, i. 339
  Danish barrows, iii. 319
  Danish camp, iv. 77. Dissertation upon 78
  Danmonia, iv. 39
  Danmonii, i. 199
  Danvers, Sir John, iii. 316, 317.――Family, i. 121
  ―――― of Dantesy, Wilts, Sir John, iii. 317, 318
  Daphne odora, iv. 181
  Dapifer, Richard, iv. 107
  Darell, Thomas, and family, iii. 240
  Darley family, and Rev. Mr. ii. 226
  Darlington, Lord, proprietor of Camelford borough, sold it since
    Reform bill, ii. 405
  Dart of Dart Ralph, Devon, family, iii. 193
  ―――― river, iii. 103――iv. 158
  Dartmoor, i. 170, 188――ii. 213――iii. 45, 431. Forest 265――iv.
    6.――Hills, iii. 253. Chain of granite hills to Land’s End, from 120.
    Road across them 121
  Dartmouth, ii. 83――iii. 105.――Pirates conveyed to, iii. 41
  ―――― William Legge, first Earl of, iii. 206
  Darwin, Dr. lines by, i. 30
  Daubeney, Giles, Lord, i. 87
  ―――― Catherine and Ralph, ii. 251. Lord 189, 191. Sheriff of
    Cornwall 186
  Daungers of Carnclew, Isabel, iii. 303. James 303 _bis_. Margaret 303
  Davenport, Judge, iii. 144
  Davey of Creed, i. 144
  David, King of Israel, i. 305, 329
  ―――― St. iii. 434 _bis_.――Bishop of Menevia, i. 24, 304, 321, 382
    _ter._ His history by Hals, and by the Editor 305. Legend of 307
  Davidstowe barton, account of, i. 305――parish, i. 21, 197, 199,
    382――ii. 401――iii. 22, 180, 275――iv. 61 _bis_, 124, 125
  DAVIDSTOWE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of living,
    incumbent, land tax, i. 304. History of St. David, barton of
    Davidstowe 305. By Tonkin, St. David. By Editor, his history more
    at large 305. Impropriation of tithes, statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 307
  Davie, John, iii. 387
  ―――― of Burnuhall, i. 147 _bis_, 148
  ―――― of Orleigh, Charles, i. 380. Account of his wife, ib.
  Davies, Henry, i. 282 _bis_.――Henry, iii. 6. Henry, great uncle to
    the Editor 307. Rev. George, Rector of Perran Uthno 307 _bis_.
    Rev. John, ditto 306, 307. Miss 429. Family 35, 47,
    216.――Catherine, the Editor’s aunt, iv. 165. William 55.――Family,
    ii. 170, 218, 304
  Davies of Bosence, i. 360. Catherine 360, 362. Elizabeth 362, 363.
    Henry 360 _bis_, 361, 365. John 360 _bis_, 362 _bis_. Mary, ib.
    Philippa, ib. William 361 _bis_. Arms 361. Crest 365. Monuments at
    St. Earth 361
  ―――― of Burnewall, in Buryan, Christopher bought Noye’s title to the
    Lanow estate, but constrained to compromise with the Earl of Bath,
    pleaded his own cause to the admiration of the court, ii. 334
  ―――― of Canonteign, Devon, Thomas, iii. 269
  ―――― of St. Earth, Catherine, i. 376.――William, ii. 34.――John and
    his daughter, iii. 159. William 145, 159
  ―――― of Gear, i. 364
  Davis, Christopher, i. 141, 144 _bis_. Henry 144. John 292. Arms
    144.――Mr. and Dr. late of Plymouth, ii. 111. John 352.――Rev. John,
    iii. 351
  Davis’s British Lexicon, i. 120
  Davy, Sir Humphrey, i. 385――ii. 218――iii. 48, 94. Anecdote of 94.
    His life by Dr. Paris 95.――His grandfather, an architect, ii. 32.
    Rev. C. W. 270.――Family, iii. 48, 94
  ―――― of St. Cuthbert, Mr. and Mrs. and family, iii. 317
  Dawnay of Cowick, Yorksh., Sir John, and arms, iii. 438
  Dawney of Sheviock, Emelyn, i. 63, 64 _bis_. Sir John 63.――Emelyn,
    iii. 436, 437, 438. Henry 438. John 437. Sir John 436. Nicholas 437,
    438 _ter._, 439. William 437. Mr. built the church, and Mrs. the
    barn 439. Family 436 _bis_, 439. Arms 437
  Dawson, the Right Hon. G. R. iv. 143. J. R. Dean of St. Patrick’s,
    furnished the Editor with information 141, 143. Captain 31
  Day of Judgment, Latin prize poem upon, ii. 154
  ―――― John and Peter, i. 216.――Dorothy, iii. 145, 159. John 159. Rev.
    John of Little Petherick 334. Peter 145
  ―――― of Tresuggan, i. 225
  Daye, i. 298
  Dayman, Rev. Charles, i. 343――ii. 233
  ―――― of Flexbury, Rev. Charles, iii. 351. John 353. Family 351
  Dead, custom of saluting, i. 183
  Deadman Point, ii. 106, 113, 115. Its Geology 115
  Dean, rural, oath of, ii. 307
  ―――― General, and his death, ii. 26
  Deane’s Essay on Dracontia, i. 141
  Decumani, i. 234
  Deer park, ii. 402
  Deerso river, its source, iv. 237
  Defoe’s Tour through Great Britain, ii. 346
  Degembris manor, iii. 269
  Degemue in Kerrier, iii. 422 _bis_
  Delabole quarry, i. 118. Slate 343
  Delahay, i. 262
  De la Mare, Peter, iv. 28
  Delcoath, i. 128, 165 _bis_.
  Delian, St. history of, i. 382
  ―――― collegiate church, i. 328
  Dell, Rev. Henry, of Ruan Lanyhorne, iii. 403, 405. Rev. John ditto 403
  Delphic oracle, iii. 162
  Delves, Sir Bryant Broughton, iii. 9
  Delyan, St. Landaff cathedral dedicated to, ii. 65
  Democracy vindicated, ii. 77
  Denham, Judge, iii. 144. Miss 191. Heir of the family 140
  Denham’s town, iii. 361
  Denis, Great and Little, i. 39
  ―――― St. i. 386, 392
  ―――― St. abbey, near Paris, ii. 169
  ―――― St. church, iii. 198
  DENIS, ST. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    name, land tax, patron, incumbent, i. 308. Saint’s history, ib.
    Church 309. Robert Dunkin, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 310
  Denmark, George Prince of, called George Drinkall, ii. 15
  Dennis family, ii. 313――iii. 23. Rev. Mr. 171
  ―――― of Leskeard, i. 143. Edward 320. George, ib.
  ―――― of Orleigh, i. 171
  ―――― of Trembath, Alexander, his character, and Miss, iii. 33
  ―――― St. name explained, iv. 313
  ―――― chapel, iii. 453
  ―――― parish, i. 212, 227, 341――iii. 58, 180, 207, 391, 395, 402, 448
    _bis_, 450 _ter._, 453
  ―――― rectory, i. 72
  Dennis, St. vicarage, iii. 448, 451, 453
  ―――― in Branwell, iii. 202
  Dennithorne, Nicholas, ii. 402
  Densill, account of, iii. 147
  ―――― barrow, iii. 147
  ―――― Alice and John, iii. 133
  ―――― of Densill, Alice, and Anne, iii. 147. John 147 _bis_. Serjeant
    John ibid. Thomas, and family 147
  ―――― of Philley, Devon, Rich. iii. 148
  Derby, lofty tower at, iii. 363
  Despatch transport, lost returning from Spain, ii. 325
  Devereux, Robert, Earl of Essex, iv. 185
  Devil’s coyts, i. 220
  Devon county, i. 113, 168, 170, 327, 334, 342――ii. 19, 71 _bis_, 77,
    109, 110 _bis_, 115, 122, 137, 149, 177, 293, 340, 413, 415,
    417――iii. 56, 254 _bis_, 256, 279, 336――iv. 39 _bis_, 40 _bis_,
    125.――Part of, iii. 457.――Insurgents enter, i. 86.――Romantic scenery
    of, and dunstone prevalent in, ii. 88. Perkin Warbeck marched into
    188. Cornish rebels enter 195. Made prisoners in 197. Blessing
    proclaimed in all its churches for the builders of Bideford bridge,
    to which most families of note contributed 341. Donne’s map of 221.
    Granite in, iii. 432. Divided from Cornwall 104. Lord Clinton
    removed to 230. Werrington parish in 460.――Many gentlemen’s sons of,
    educated at Wike St. Mary, iv. 134. Charles 1st marched through 185
  ―――― bishops of, iii. 415
  ―――― member of parliament for, Sir T. D. Ackland, iii. 271
  ―――― sheriffs of, ii. 43, 130 _bis_, 196, 341 _bis_.――Thomas
    Arundell, iii. 141. John Cheyney 116.――William, John, and John de
    Cheyney, iv. 43.――James Chudleigh, ii. 189.――Sir John Damerell,
    iii. 60. Stephen Durneford 101, 141. Sir Peers, Peter, and Sir
    Rich. Edgecumbe 103. Sir Richard Edgecumbe 101, 103. Richard Hals
    and William Wadham 116
  ―――― Earl of, iii. 350, 438 _bis_――A faggot belonging to, ii.
    410.――Ordgar, iii. 384, 460; and Elphrida his Countess, iv.
    6.――Ordulf, iii. 385. Courtenay, Edward Hugh 10th, i. 63.――Edward
    11th, and Edward 12th, iii. 436.――Edward 12th, or the blind, Edward
    13th.――Edward 16th, i. 64.――Edward 16th, ii. 189.――William 17th,
    Edward 18th.――Thomas, i. 64――iii. 350 _bis_
  Devonport, i. 266
  Devynock, i. 172
  Dewen of Marazion, Alice, iii. 54
  Dewer, Captain, ii. 219
  Deweston, ii. 430
  Dewin, Mr. ii. 83
  De Witt’s engagement with Blake, ii. 25
  Deza, Donna Giovanna, i. 311
  Diamond, history of the Pitt, i. 68. Weight, drawing of it, worn by
    the Kings of France in their hat, stolen at the Revolution, but
    recovered, placed by Napoleon between the teeth of a crocodile in
    the handle of his sword 69
  Diana, shrine makers of, ii. 53
  Dictionnaire Historique, i. 111
  Dictionary, first Latin and English, written by Sir Thomas Elliot,
    ii. 66
  ―――― Holwell’s Mythological, Etymological and Historical, iii. 171
  Digby, Col. iv. 186. Lord, combat of his troop with Straughans ibid.
  Dilic, St. i. 2
  Dillington, Dorothy, iii. 346
  Dillon, Rev. Robert, ii. 123
  Dinah’s cave, iii. 282
  Dinam, Geoffrey de, ii. 415 _bis_
  Dinant, Oliver de, i. 168 _bis_, 170
  Dinas, Little, promontory and fortification, its siege, i. 40
  Dingle, Miss, iii. 65
  Dinham bridge, i. 168
  ―――― family, i. 349. Charles 170. John _quin._ and Josce 168. Lady
    Elizabeth 170. Galfred de 168. Jane Lady Zouch, Joan Lady Arundell
    and Elizabeth Lady FitzWarren 170 _bis_. Margaret Lady Carew 170 and
    171. Arms 170.――Lanhearn descended lineally from, iii.
    150.――William, iv. 45. Family 62
  ――――’s land, iii. 41
  Dinnavall quarry, iv. 45
  Dinsull, ii. 172
  Dioclesian, Emperor, i. 52. His fortune told by a Druid 192.――St.
    Alban martyred under, ii. 64
  Diodorus Siculus, ii. 4, 20
  Dion, ii. 162
  Diosma ericoides, iv. 183
  Diploma of D. C. L. from Oxford University, iii. 50
  Dirford castle, iv. 228
  Disne, Le, river, ii. 64
  D’Israeli, ii. 78. His Commentaries, his Eliot, Hampden, and Pym 78
  Dissenters, their contest with the establishment for Proselytism,
    ii. 133
  Divine Legation, iii. 69
  Divinity, James’s introduction to, iii. 155
  Dix, Rev. E. of Truro, iv. 92
  Dobbins, Mr. iii. 162
  Doble, John, iii. 185
  Dock, iv. 33
  Doddridge’s History, iii. 28.――Of the Duchy of Cornwall, ii.
    404.――Of Wales and Cornwall, (Sir John,) iv. 8
  Dodman point, ii. 330
  Dodson, Robert, iii. 358.――Family, i. 221
  ―――― of Hay, i. 411. Arms 412
  ―――― of London, i. 412
  Dogherty family, ii. 362
  Doidge, Rev. Mr. of Tallant, iv. 23
  Dolben, Mr. iii. 17.――Mr. Justice, appointed to Cornwall, his
    administration of the law a happiness to the county, ii. 52.
    Petition to Charles II. against him 53. His name struck off the
    commission 54
  Dole abbey, in Franche Comté, iii. 281
  ―――― Sampson, Archbishop of, iii. 336
  Dolichos lignosus, iv. 181
  Domesday, ii. 379
  ―――― Book, ii. 51, 70, 169, 175, 259, 299, 315, 319, 384――iii. 22,
    27, 44, 46, 64, 74, 78, 101, 110, 111, 114, 117, 118, 124, 127, 139,
    143, 161, 163, 169, 175, 182, 190, 195, 196, 198, 237, 261, 276, 291
    _bis_, 345, 349, 352, 365, 391, 393, 400, 402, 421, 422, 441, 451,
    456, 461――iv. 1, 6, 12, 15, 19, 20, 39, 43, 48, 50, 52, 61, 63, 66,
    67, 68, 70, 81, 93 _bis_, 94, 96, 99, 102, 110, 115, 117, 118 _bis_,
    124, 128, 137, 139, 153, 155, 160, 161
  Domesday Roll, ii. 48, 62, 86, 92, 94, 106, 151, 155, 226, 253,
    320――iv. 184
  ―――― Survey, iv. 62, 93
  ―――― Tax, ii. 36, 50, 59, 80, 129, 141, 145, 229, 232, 251, 257,
    273, 275, 291, 315, 332, 335, 340
  Dominica, St. i. 315
  Dominican abbey, Dublin, iv. 147
  ―――― chapel and friary at Truro, iv. 73
  ―――― friars, iv. 73. Walter de Exeter said to be one 111
  Dominicans, i. 176, 312. _See Friars_
  Dominick, St. i. 175 _bis_. De Gusman 310, 315. His history 311
  ―――― St. parish, i. 151, 153――ii. 309, 364, 375――iii. 161, 167, 345
  DOMINICK, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, saint’s
    history, i. 311. Dominican friars 312. Halton ibid. By Tonkin,
    Crockaddon 313. Pentilly 314. Halton, the Saint, a Female 315. By
    the Editor, Francis Rous, Charles Fitz-Geoffrey, Sir James Tillie
    315. New mansion at Pentilly, statistics, rector, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 316
  Domitian, i. 198――iv. 165, 167
  Doncaster, John, ii. 189
  Doniert, i. 178, 179 _bis_, 180 _ter._, 182 _bis_, 195 _ter._
  Donne, Benjamin, ii. 221
  ――――’s Map of Devonshire, ii. 221
  Donneny manor, iv. 127
  Donnithorne, i. 8
  Dorchester, St. Berimus, Bishop of, ii. 60
  ―――― Oxon, i. 407
  Dorset, i. 334
  ―――― county, H. Bankes, M.P. for, iii. 221
  ―――― Thomas Grey, Duke of, iii. 294
  ―――― Thomas Grey, Marquis of, iii. 350
  Dosmeny pool, i. 178, 189.――By Leland, iv. 285
  Dotson of Roskymer, Henry, iii. 324 _bis_, 325. John 325 _bis_
  Douay college, iii. 143 _bis_
  Dovenot, i. 168
  Dover castle, ii. 10
  ―――― town, ii. 10, 76――iii. 10.――A cinque port, ii. 38. Enlarged and
    made a packet station 45.――Change of its name, iii. 29. High water
    at 98
  Dower park, account of, ii. 336
  Doweringe, Rev. Mr. ii. 291
  Down hills, ii. 121
  Downes, Rev. Mr. i. 129.――Mr. ii. 119, 120 _quat._
  Downevet borough, ii. 420
  Dozmere, account of, and stories relating to, iii. 265. Etymology 266
  Dracæna australis, iv. 181
  Dracontia, Essay on, i. 141
  Drake, Sir Francis, i. 315――ii. 21――iii. 460――iv. 86.――John, ii.
    195.――Z. H. iii. 256
  ――――’s island, iii. 108
  Dranna point, ii. 331
  Draper, i. 283
  Drayns, East, manor of, in St. Neot and St. Cleere, iii. 359
  Drayton’s Polyolbion, App. 8, iv. 293 to 308, and notes from 308 to 311
  Drew, Mr. iv. 34.――Miss, i. 39
  ――――’s Teignton, Devon, ii. 98
  Drift, account of, iii. 427
  Drillavale quarry, iv. 45
  Drineck, ii. 260
  Drinking at St. Colomb, i. 219
  Drinkwater, Rev. Mr. i. 398
  Drogo, iii. 33
  Druid, female, prophesies Dioclesian’s elevation to the throne, i. 192
  Druidical antiquities of the Scilly islands, iv. 175
  ―――― basons, i. 185, 186 _bis_, 187, 190. A very large one 191
  ―――― learning, iii. 52
  ―――― monument, i. 196
  ―――― residence, fine site for, i. 192
  Druids, i. 183――iii. 49, 290, 385.――Etymology and account of, i. 192
  Druis, Celtic, i. 192
  Drummond, Lady, i. 313.――Sir Adam and his daughter, iii. 201. Sir
    William 200.――Sir William and his two daughters, iv. 156
  Drus, British and Greek, i. 192
  Dry tree, iii. 127, 138
  Dublin, i. 295 _ter._――iv. 146
  ―――― cathedral, iv. 143 _bis_. Archbishops of 146. Michael de
    Tregury, Archbishop of 138. Taken prisoner at sea 146. Few records
    of the prelates and dignitaries 144
  ―――― city and diocese, iv. 146
  ―――― St. Patrick’s church at, iv. 138, 146
  Dubritius, St. Bishop of Landaff, i. 382
  Du Cange, ii. 369.――His Glossary, iii. 389
  Duchy Exchequer, iv. 99. Leonard Lovice, receiver general 41
  ―――― officers, negotiation of Helston with, ii. 164
  Duckenfield, Captain, monument to, ii. 325
  Duckworth, Admiral, iii. 440
  Duddowe, i. 243
  Dugdale, ii. 163, 344――iii. 111, 441――iv. 101.――His Baronage, ii.
    91――iii. 27.――His Monasticon Anglicanum, i. 217, 300――ii. 62, 96,
    208――iii. 78, 232, 332, 372, 446――iv. 6, 26, 100, 105.――His short
    view, &c. iii. 26. His Warwickshire 317
  Dukas’s account of the Paleologi, ii. 368
  Dulo parish, ii. 298, 391, 394.――Road to Hessenford from, iv. 30. Or
    Duloe, ii. 397――iii. 245, 253, 291, 302, 347
  DULO parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient state,
    value of benefice, i. 316. Patrons, incumbent, landtax, rector,
    story of a Rev. Mr. Forbes, new vicarage house 317. Death of Rev.
    Mr. Fincher, council against lay impropriation, Trewergy 318.
    Tremada, Westnorth 319. Trenant, Trewenn 320. By Tonkin, value of
    benefice, Trenant, ib. By Editor, etymology from Archbishop Usher,
    and Bond’s Sketches of East and West Looe, history of St.
    Theliaus, Treworgy, Trenant 321. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 322
  Dundagell castle, i. 328, 329, 330 _bis_, 332. Account of 323
  ―――― manor, i. 322――iv. 43
  ―――― parish, i. 372, 404――ii. 259――iii. 81――iv. 20, 42, 66, 94
  ―――― Robert de, i. 323
  DUNDAGELL or TINTAGELL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, manor, ancient name, i. 322. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, landtax, market, fair, Trebennen, borough arms, court
    leet, representatives, family of Dundagell, castle 323.
    Consecrated well and chapel, Pendew, Porth Horne, rock arch over
    the sea 324. Lines on the castle, and on King Arthur 325. Arthur’s
    history, King Uter’s surname and arms, his victories 326. Love for
    Igerne 327. Merlin procures him admittance to her 330. Marries
    her, his death 332. Merlin’s prophecy of Arthur 333. Arthur’s
    victories over the Saxons 334, and Romans 335. Round Table, his
    arms 336. Death, and discovery of his tomb 337. Edward Third’s
    Knights of the Round Table 339. By Editor, remarks on Arthur and
    the castle 340. Impropriation of benefice, two other chapels 341.
    Print of Arthur by Caxton, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr.
    Boase. Kneighton’s Kieve 343
  Dundee, ii. 66
  Dunecheine, name for Dundagell, i. 322, 324
  Dunechine, i. 342
  Dungarvon, fishing nets introduced from, ii. 264
  Dungeness, sea fight before, iii. 26
  Dungerth, i. 182 _ter._ His monument 179 _bis_, 184 _ter._, 195.
    Inscription of 180. Vault under it 181. Inscription 180, 182
  Dunheved church, iii. 458
  Dunhevet castle, ii. 417, 427
  ―――― town 417. Inhabitants drawn to Launceston 418
  Dunkin, Robert, i. 310――iii. 83
  Dunkirk, ii. 55――iv. 157
  Dunmeer, i. 368
  Dunscombe, Mr. iii. 125
  Dunstan, St. iii. 415.――Wished to make St. Udith Queen, iv. 94
  ―――― St. parish, London, iii. 251
  Dunstanvill, i. 36
  Dunstanville barons from Henry I. to Henry III. ii. 249. Barony
    conferred 249
  ―――― Reginald de, ii. 239.――Earl of Cornwall, iv. 169.――Family, ii. 239
  ―――― Lord de, i. 114, 137, 164.――ii. 23――iii. 239, 353, 386――iv.
    107, 136, 154.――Godrevy, his property, ii. 150. Memoir of 243.
    Joined Lord North’s party 245. Headed the Cornish miners in
    defence of Plymouth, and created a baronet 246. French revolution
    247. Created a peer, his connexion with the Plantagenets, and
    private character 249. Marriages and issue 250.――His marriage,
    iii. 230. His death, and public monument 389.――His edition of
    Carew, i. 241, 258, 341――ii. 45, 109, 120, 294, 394 _bis_, 398,
    409, 419――iii. 28, 39, 79, 81, 91, 102, 150, 171, 179, 279, 287,
    302, 388, 393――iv. 132
  Dunster, Reginald de Mohun, Lord of, iii. 293
  Dunstone prevalent in Cornwall and Devon, ii. 88
  ―――― rock, iii. 256.――Rocks, ii. 234
  Dunveth, i. 117
  Duporth, iv. 104
  Durant, family, iii. 270.――Family and heir, iv. 16
  Dureford, monastery at, iii. 206
  Durham county, i. 183, 289, 290
  ―――― bishops of, Ralph Flambard, and William Carilepho, i. 290
  ―――― bishopric, transferred from Lindisfarne, i. 290. Immunities
    curtailed and restored 291. Arms of 291
  Durneford family, iii. 107
  ―――― of Devon, Stephen and Miss, iii. 101, 102. Family 101
  ―――― of Stonehouse, i. 347
  Durnford, Stephen, iii. 374
  Dutch fleet, engagements of with English, ii. 25, 26, 28
  ―――― man of war, a fight with, ii. 41
  ―――― ships driven into Falmouth harbour, ii. 6
  ―――― squadron, iii. 287
  ―――― war, ii. 27, 28, 42, 94, 267.――Wars, iii. 186
  Duvaura dependens, iv. 181
  ―――― undulata, iv. 181
  Duverdier’s History of the Swiss Cantons, iii. 186
  Dye, St. history of, ii. 131, 133
  ―――― chapel of, ii. 131, 133
  ―――― town of, ii. 131
  Dynas castle, iv. 228
  Dynham family, i. 167, 168 _ter._ John 169 _bis_. Lord 170.――Galfrid
    de, iv. 156

  Eadbald, King of Kent, iii. 281
  Eadnothus, bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  ―――― brother of Alpsius, Duke of Devon and Cornwall, ii. 420
  ―――― Bishop of Devon, iii. 415, 416
  Eagle vicarage, ii. 363
  ―――― white, Cornish for, i. 120
  Earle, Mr. i. 296
  EARME, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, antiquity,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, saint’s history, i.
    393. Tregaza, Godolphin blowing house 394. The cat eating the
    dolphin 395. Truthan, Treworgan, Treworgan Vean, Innis 396. Trehane
    397. By Tonkin, Cargaul, Jago family 397. Killigrew 398. Ennis,
    Polglace 399. Trevillon 400. By Editor, advowson, Mr. Wynne
    Pendarves 400. Polsew 402. Treworgan, Truthan, Killigrew, statistics
    403. Geology by Dr. Boase 404
  Earth, St. bridge, i. 360
  ―――― St. church, i. 345, 377
  ―――― parish, ii. 169――iii. 5, 46, 125
  EARTH, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    state, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, land-tax,
    Trewinard, i. 344. Arrest of a member of parliament, murder by Mr.
    Trewinard 345. Fatal duel 346. Other murders by gentlemen,
    Trenhayle 347. Trelizike 348. Gurlyn 349. By Tonkin, name,
    Trewinard 349. Trelisick 350. By the Editor, name, church,
    monuments in it 351. Vicars 353. Curious story of Mr. Symonds 354.
    Glebe, vicarage house, churchyard, bridge widened by the Editor,
    adjoining parishes 355. Trewinnard 356. Improved by Mr. Hawkins,
    artificially supplied with a stream of water 358. Trelisick 359.
    Tredrea, Bosence, Roman intrenchments 360. Monuments of the Davies
    family 361. Perthcolumb Gear, Tregethes, copper mill at Trewinnard
    364. Genlyn, Treloweth, tin smelting house there, Lamb tin 365.
    Statistics, feast, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase, school 366
  East Angles, Sigebert King of, ii. 284
  East, hundred, i. 151, 153, 377――ii. 226, 229, 250, 361, 363, 364,
    377, 417――iii. 1, 37, 40, 41, 43, 101, 161, 167, 335, 345, 371, 374,
    436, 437 _bis_, 456, 457, 461――iv. 6, 7, 50, 59 _bis_, 63 _bis_, 68,
    69, 376
  ―――― India Company, ii. 227
  ―――― Indies, ii. 100
  ―――― Saxons, Sebert King of, ii. 284
  ―――― St. pool, ii. 281
  Eastbourne, Sussex, iii. 33
  Eastcot village, iii. 255
  Eastwellshire hundred, i. 310, 409――ii. 59, 309.――Etymology, i. 32
  Eata, St. bishop of Lindisfarne or Hexham, history of his see, iv.
    42. His death 43
  Eath, St. parish, ii. 332
  Eaton, Rev. D. iii. 463, 464
  Ebbingford, Thomas de Waunford, Lord of, iv. 13
  ―――― or Efford manor, account of, iv. 16. By Leland 258
  Ebchester, i. 183
  Ebiorite heresy, iii. 59
  Ecclesiastical courts, iii. 155
  Ecclesis Gwenwan, i. 321
  Echard, ii. 78
  Echium grandiflora, iv. 182
  ―――― nervosum, iv. 182
  Eddystone lighthouse, its situation, iii. 375. History of the first
    376. Of the second, fire, accident from the burning lead 377.
    History and description of the present 378
  ―――― rocks, iii. 376
  Edeston island, iv. 238
  Edgar, King, iv. 93, 97
  Edgecombe of Cuttvyle, Sir Pierce, and Hon. Richard, iii. 374.
    Family 375
  Edgecumbe, Hon. Richard, i. 417. Sir Richard 153, 154, 417, 418.
    William 154.――Peter, ii. 189. Peter sheriff of Devon 235. Sir Peter
    187. Sir Richard 100, 108 _bis_, 115 _bis_, 187. Sir Henry
    Bodrigan’s defence against 115.――Hon. Richard, iii. 374. Sir Richard
    394. Roger 358. Miss 199. Mr. 107.――Hon. Richard, iv. 75.――Family,
    i. 154 _ter._, 157, 421――ii. 362, 393――iii. 190 _bis_, 203――iv. 71,
    136 _bis_, 143, 158. Arms 72
  ―――― of Bodrigan, Richard, ii. 114
  ―――― of Mount Edgecumbe, Sir Richard, ii. 114.――Sir Peers, iii. 102,
    103. Peter 101, 103 _bis_, 104. Sir Peter 104. Sir Piers Lord of
    Cotehele and of East Stonehouse 101. Richard, Richard, Richard,
    Richard 104. Sir Richard 102, 103, 104. Sir Richard favoured Henry
    the 7th’s pretensions 101. His narrow escape and subsequent reward
    102. Built a chapel and was sheriff 103. His struggle with Bodrigan
    for plunder 204. On the winning side at Bosworth 204. Family 101,
    194. History in Carew 104. Arms 103
  Edinburgh, iii. 94
  Editha, St. her early death, self denial, legend of, her mother
    Abbess of Wilton, iv. 96
  Editor, ii. 83, 99, 100. A descendant and heir at law of
    Attorney-general Noye 339. M.P. for Helston 160, 164. On poor law
    committee 159. Remembers an English fleet of 40 sail pursued up the
    Channel by an enemy of nearly double 247. Remembers a cloister at
    St. Bennet’s 387. Has seen an original receipt of a fine for
    non-attendance at the Coronation of James I. 269. Has heard
    traditionary accounts of the plague 271. Is indebted to the Rev. J.
    Smythe for admission to Pembroke College 287. Character he has heard
    of Mr. Knile 267. Mr. K.’s monument stands on his land 268. His
    remembrance of Mr. Pitt 154. His memoir of and friendship for Lord
    de Dunstanville 243, and feelings in writing of him 249. His
    inquiries on the subject of the vessel driven from Charlestown to
    St. Ives 268. His remarks on the superstition, monastic
    institutions, and devastations of the 16th century 425.――The heir of
    Humphrey Noye, iii. 151. His education 96. His age 273. His
    connexion with Sir Humphrey Davy 94. Introduced him to Dr. Beddoes
    251. Raised a subscription for replacing the rocks at Trereen Dinas,
    and Lanyon Cromlech 32. Has printed Keigwin’s translations 288.
    Remembers Sarah Coat, who lived to the age of a hundred and four
    460. Possesses the manor of Lamellin 20. An old receipt 6. A MS. of
    Noye’s 154, and his picture of which he has presented a copy to
    Exeter College 156. Has also the marriage contract of Humphrey Noye
    ibid. and a letter of Mr. J. Trevanion’s 204. Found the form of oath
    for rural deans 307. His visit to Mr. Walker 4. His remarks upon Dr.
    Borlase 49. Upon the Book of Job 69, and on Hugh Peters 71. His
    character of Penzance corporation 92. Remarks on the method of
    making signals 106. On Plymouth breakwater 108. On monasticism,
    popish mummeries 122, 262, 301, 332, 399, 401. On the succession of
    animal and vegetable life 174. On the motives of civil wars 203. On
    etymologies 206. On representation 272. On old age 273. On the
    Lionesse country 331. On Elizabeth’s laws against papists, and on
    the reigns of the Tudors 370. On the purchase of advowsons by a
    society 400. On Hals’s specimen of Homer 420. His character and
    biography of Mr. Whitaker 406.――Possesses a manor in Towednack
    parish, iv. 54. Purchased Trereen Dinas 166. His remarks on the
    alteration of ancient gothic churches, and its cause 103.――His
    mother and residence, i. 360.――His grandfather, ii. 34. And
    great-grandfather 146, 160
  Edles in Kenwen, iv. 73
  ―――― manor, ii. 315. Account of ibid.
  Edmonds, Everard, iv. 77
  Edmondsbury, St. i. 338
  Edmund Earl of Cornwall, iv. 4 _bis_
  ―――― Ironside, i. 211
  ―――― saint and king, i. 407 _bis_
  ――――’s, St. chapel, iii. 317, 318
  Edmunds, Henry, ii. 30
  Edulphus bishop of Exeter, ii. 7
  Edward the elder, king, i. 407――iii. 1, 416
  ―――― the martyr, king, his death, iv. 94
  ―――― the confessor, king, i. 25――ii. 38, 61, 73, 174, 177, 205
    _bis_, 208, 214――iii. 130, 365, 416. Saint 363――iv. 155.――Built St.
    Michael’s church, ii. 202. His charter to it 208. Translated 209.
    Placed a priory of benedictine monks there 208
  Edward 1st, king, ii. 38, 89, 155, 313, iii. 361 _bis_, 384, 394,
    409, 412, 414, _bis_, 15, 26, 44, 56 _bis_, 101, 111, 112, 116, 129,
    132, 165, 214, 230, 245, 254, 257, 261, 277, 284, 291 _bis_, 334,
    336, 339, 345, 347, 349, 352, 354, 372, 374 _bis_, 384, 389, 396,
    398, 403, 405 _bis_, 437, 438, 442, 449, 457――iv. 7, 15 _bis_, 23,
    24, 43 _bis_, 44, 62, 66, 67, 76, 83, 84, 95, 96 _bis_, 102, 112
    _bis_, 118, 119, 128, 129, 139, 140, 153 _bis_, 157 _bis_, 162
    _bis_.――Frequented Helston, ii. 156
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 6, 38, 363, 409, 410――iii. 26, 129, 165, 211, 316, 405
    _ter._――iv. 3, 96
  ―――― 3rd, ii. 4, 6, 38 _bis_, 45, 120, 146, 155, 176, 177, 209, 302,
    316, 336, 341, 409――iii. 15, 27, 56, 60, 65, 79, 115, 129, 130, 133
    _bis_, 140, 199, 200, 212, 270, 316, 323, 372, 381, 405――iv. 6
    _bis_, 8, 13, 21 _bis_, 43, 101, 103, 139, 156, 171
  ―――― 4th, ii. 108 _bis_, 182 _quin._, 183, 185, 186, 188, 191, 209,
    251, 254, 260, 341 _bis_――iii. 116, 141, 147, 168, 211, 247, 270,
    274――iv. 13, 22 _bis_, 43 _bis_, 161.――His commission to punish the
    Foy pirates, ii. 41
  ―――― 6th, ii. 72, 196, 197, 198, 326, 335, 386, 404, 414――iii. 170,
    208, 268――iv. 135
  ―――― the Black Prince, iii. 27――iv. 4, 8. The first duke of
    Cornwall, won his plume at Cressy 72
  Edwards, John, i. 364, 365.――John, iii. 342. Notice of 340. Joseph
    341. Mr. 196. Family, curious tenure of 178
  Edwardsia grandiflora, iv. 182
  ―――― microphylla, iv. 182
  Edwyn, King of Northumbria, iii. 284. His death ibid.
  Efford, iii. 270.――Near Stratton, ii. 184.――Sir J. Arundell removed
    from, iii. 274
  Egbert, King, iii. 322
  Egbright, the 13th King of England or the West Saxons, ii. 310.――His
    victory, iv. 6
  Egerton, Lord, ii. 9
  Egeus, Pro-consul of Rome in Achaia, commanded the crucifixion of
    St. Andrew, iv. 101
  Egid, St. ii. 430
  Eglesderry in Kerrier, iii. 442 _ter._
  Egleshale parish, ii. 340
  Egleshayle church, i. 75, 372. Tower 374
  ―――― of Egleshayle, Matthew, and arms, i. 374
  ―――― parish, i. 234, 351, 372――ii. 151, 332――iii. 64, 74, 237.
    Living of 301
  EGLESHAYLE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    state, patron, incumbent, rector, value of benefice, land tax,
    founder, park, i. 367. Peverell’s crosses, Prior’s cross, Cornish
    proverb, Pencarrow 368. Camp in Pencarrow-park 369. Kestell 370.
    Rudavy Croan 371. Epitaph, Tregleah castle, Killy Biry, Ward bridge
    372. Piers laid on woolpacks 373. Church tower built 374. By Tonkin,
    Pencarrow ibid. Padstow harbour, Croan 376. By the Editor, Wade
    bridge, Pendavy 376. Crowan, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, vicar 377
  ―――― Thomas Longbound, vicar of, i. 373. Vicarage 130
  EGLESKERRY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, i. 377.
    Impropriation, ancient state, manor of Penheale, mathematical school
    at Looe 378. Trelynike 379. By Tonkin, saint, small-pox ibid. By
    Editor, proprietors of Penheale 380. Statistics, vicar, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 381
  Egles Merthyr barton, iii. 180. Tenement 209
  Eglesros or Egles Ross parish, ii. 275――iii. 402
  Eglos Crock church, ii. 256
  Egloskerry parish, i. 197, 381――ii. 377, 399, 430――iii. 38, 457,
    461――iv. 50, 51, 59, 60 _quat._, 63 _bis_, 64, 68, 69
  Egypt, iii. 187.――The Saracens in possession of, ii. 37. Deserts of 279
  Eldon, Lord Chancellor, iii. 253, 290, 351
  Eleanor, Queen, i. 339
  Eledred, St. i. 200
  Elementa Logicæ, ii. 33
  Elerchy manor, ii. 50――iii. 404――iv. 116 _bis_. House 118, 121
  Elerci, several places in Gallia so called, iv. 116
  Elercky parish, iv. 116, 118 _quater._ Etymology 118
  Elerky and Ruan Lanyhorne in Ruan and St. Veryan, ii. 359.――Manors,
    iii. 406
  ―――― mills, iv. 119
  Elford, Miss, iii. 66.――Family, i. 347, 387――ii. 293, 427
  ―――― of Roach and St. Dennis, iv. 161 _bis_
  Eliot, Mr. i. 321.――Edward Craggs, ii. 75. Rev. John 354. Sir John
    77 _quin._, 78 _quat._ Richard 75. Sir Richard 71. Sir Thomas 66,
    71. Walter 71. Lord 78, 86. Family 66, 252. Its origin 66.――John,
    and Sir John the celebrated patriot, iii. 39, 337. Rev. Robert,
    fifty years rector of Pillaton 346.――Family, iv. 12, 127
  ―――― of Berks, ii. 66
  ―――― of Cambridgeshire, ii. 66
  ―――― of Devon, ii. 66
  ―――― of Port Eliot, John, i. 379.――Daniel, ii. 71. Edward 70, 71,
    72, 77. John 71. Sir John 66, 70, 71 _bis_. Katharine and Nicholas
    71. Richard 70 _bis_, 71.――Lord Eliot, iii. 39. William his son 39, 337
  Elizabeth, popular abbreviation of, iv. 120
  ―――― daughter of King Edward 1st, i. 63
  ―――― Queen, i. 344――ii. 6, 7 _bis_, 44 _bis_, 56, 66, 68, 69 _bis_,
    213, 215, 227, 233, 293, 314, 341 _bis_, 342, 344, 414――iii. 8, 16,
    20, 67, 103 _bis_, 104, 105, 119, 134, 199 _bis_, 212, 234, 242,
    287, 293, 294, 311, 317 _bis_, 318, 325 _quater_, 357, 358 _bis_,
    360, 369, 370, 445, 463 _bis_――iv. 20, 41, 107, 172. Gave a charter
    to Truro 73
  ―――― Princess, iii. 27
  Ellery of St. Colomb Major, marshal of Lydford castle, iii. 184
  Ellett, i. 274. John 272
  Elliot, ii. 232
  Elliott, Mrs. sister of Ralph Allen, Esq. i. 58. Rev. St. John
    12.――Miss, ii. 33.――Miss, niece of Mr. Allen of Bath, iv. 89
  Ellis, George, i. 271, 275.――John, iii. 429. Pascoe 83. Arms 429,
    432. Family monuments 432
  ―――― of Bray, John, ii. 282
  ―――― of Tregethes, i. 364
  Elmsworthy, account of, ii. 347
  Elphrida, Countess of Devon, iv. 6
  Elvan courses, i. 159――iv. 5
  Ely, Francis Turner, Bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  Emelianus, i. 197
  Emendationes in Suidam, ii. 265
  Enador parish, iii. 267
  Enchanted Lovers, a pastoral, iv. 97
  Endelient, i. 1
  Endellion or St. Endellyan parish, ii. 332, 340――iii. 179, 237,
    241――iv. 44, 47
  Eneas, i. 153
  ENEDELLYAN, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity,
    stunt, his history, i. 382. Value of benefice, Roscurok, Trefreke,
    Tresongar, Pennant, Cheny 383. By Tonkin, Roscarrake, Trefreke 384.
    By Editor, Port Isaac, church, rectory, and prebends 384. Church,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 385
  Enedor, St. parish, i. 209, 212――ii. 353, 355, 356――iv. 20, 140
  Enedor-Bosithney borough, iii. 81
  England, ii. 373, 407――iii. 450――iv. 172.――Miserable state of, ii.
    375. French invasion of 40. Peace of France and Holland with 43.
    Tobacco sold cheap in 43. St. Mellitus preached in 288. Some
    Paleologi may still be living in 369. Theodore’s settlement in 370,
    372, 373. Duke of Bracciano came to 371. Greek language fashionable
    in 373.――its water communication interrupted by chalk hills, iii.
    10. First impropriation of benefices in 114. St. Sennan, the most
    westerly point in 431.――Copyholds in, iv. 54. Lands in, given to
    foreign monasteries 99. Wars between France and 144. St. Dunstan
    wished to make St. Udith queen of 94
  ―――― crown of, iv. 145
  ―――― King of, ii. 146――iv. 7
  ―――― kings of, ii. 259, 422――iii. 168, 442――iv. 6.――Their eldest son
    to be Duke of Cornwall for ever, ii. 422.――Arms, iv. 71
  ―――― and France, Perkin Warbeck proclaimed King of, ii. 188
  English channel, ii. 358, 398, 409
  ―――― crown, iii. 451, 452
  ―――― Etymological Dictionary, iii. 148
  ―――― fleet encounters the Dutch, ii. 25. Refuses quarter, and
    defeats the enemy 26. Forced into Falmouth harbour ibid. Dismissed
    without pay 29. Detained at home 246. Cruizing while combined fleets
    were in Falmouth sound 246
  English language, iv. 126. Life of Guy, Earl of Warwick, in old 113
  ―――― men, iv. 99. On one side of Tamar 40. Fought against the Turks,
    ii. 371
  ―――― romance, ii. 214
  ―――― squadron captured Cadiz, iii. 287
  ―――― wars, iv. 75
  Enmour, island of, iv. 171
  Ennis, account of, i. 399――ii. 218
  Enny, St. chapel, and probably well, iii. 426
  Ennys, Samuel, iii. 327
  Enodoc, St. iii. 240
  Enodor, St. iii. 268
  ―――― parish, i. 160――ii. 270
  ENODOR, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, saint, his advice to
    Augustus, Carvinike, i. 386. Pencoll, Gourounsan, Trewheler,
    flatness of the country, fall of the church tower, mines, two rivers
    387. By Tonkin, hundred, history of St. Athenodorus, Summercourt,
    Penhele, and Fraddon villages, fairs, Michel village 388. Members of
    parliament, borough system, Reform Bill 389. Illustrious
    representatives of Michell, right of voting 390. Reform election,
    Pencoose, Trewhele, Treweere 391. Gomronson, Boswallow, Michell
    manor, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 392
  Ensham, abbot of, i. 233
  Ensleigh cottage, i. 26
  Entrenchment, Roman, at Bosence, i. 360
  Eny water, ii. 427 _bis_
  Enys, ii. 93
  ―――― John, ii. 97. Samuel 31, 97, 100, 317. Family and etymology of
    name, by Tonkin 97
  ―――― of Enys, John, ii. 93, 243. J. S. 57, 99, 243. Built a new
    house at Enys 100.――Mr. and his character, iii. 38. Family 332
  Ephesus, ii. 53
  Epigrams, Greek, anthology of, iv. 87
  Epimachus, St. ii. 81
  Epitaph of Richard Carew of Anthony, with observations upon it,
    Appendix XIV. iv. 378
  Ercedekne, Sir John l’, iii. 373
  Ercildowne, Thomas of, ii. 308
  Ergan, St. i. 351
  Erica ciliaris, iii. 230
  ―――― vagans, iii. 173, 260――iv. 180
  ―――― A multiflora, grows on all the uncultivated serpentine rock in
    Cornwall, ii. 331
  Ericornus fragrans, iv. 182
  ―――― punctata, iv. 181
  Eriobotrya japonica, iv. 182
  Eriocephalus africanus, iv. 182
  Erisey barton, iii. 416.――Account of, ii. 116
  ―――― Miss, i. 305.――Richard, ii. 6. Family 116, 117, 170, and arms
    116.――De, George, iii. 417. James 419. Richard 383. Richard, story
    of 417. Miss 135, 417. Mr. anecdote of 418. Family 258, 416, 419.
    Arms 419
  ―――― of Brickleigh, Devon, James, iii. 417
  ―――― of Trethewoll, James, i. 408
  Erisy, i. 125, 136 _bis_
  Erme, St. church, i. 402.――Monument to Dr. Cardew in, iv. 85
  ―――― St. parish, i. 207――ii. 2, 93, 146, 353, 355, 356――iii. 354
  ERNEY, ST. parish, part of Landrake, church still existing, Hals’s
    MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, etymology, Eagle
    vicarage, Lincolnshire, a daughter to Landrake. By Editor, Trelugan
    manor, Markwell, church entitled to service only once a month, ii.
    363. Statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 364
  Erroll, James Carr, Earl of, iii. 172
  Erth, St. parish, i. 261, 417――ii. 80, 99, 100, 225.――By Leland, iv.
    267――The vicar’s sister, iii. 310
  Ervan, St. church, i. 74
  ―――― St. parish, i. 409――ii. 256――iii. 334, 335
  ERVAN, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    state, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, i. 404.
    Trenbleigh, discovery of a sepulchral urn there, Treranall 405. By
    Tonkin, Treravall, Trenowith 406. By Editor, statistics, rector,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 406
  Ervyn, St. parish, i. 407――iii. 175, 179
  Escallonia rubra, iv. 182
  ―――― montividiensis, iv. 182
  Escott, Thomas, iv. 37
  Escudifer, a French family, i. 210
  Ess family, ii. 153
  Esse, Radolpho de, ii. 119
  Essex county, Henry Marney, sheriff of, iii. 65
  ―――― Earl of, i. 113 _ter._, 114.――The parliamentary general, ii.
    277――iii. 20, 42, 73, 184――iv. 75.――Lord, ii. 411. Marched to
    relieve Plymouth, then into Cornwall, iv. 185. Hemmed in by the
    king’s troops, and obliged to retire alone 187. Followed by his
    principal officers 188. His army 186
  Est Low, by Leland, iv. 279
  Establishment, church, its contest with dissenters for proselytism,
    ii. 133
  Estcot, Richard, ii. 423
  Estwaye, ii. 429
  Ethelbert, King of Kent, ii. 284――iii. 284 _bis_
  ―――― 2nd, King, i. 407
  Ethelburga, Queen of Northumbria, iii. 284 _bis_
  Ethelfleda, wife of Earl Alric, iii. 263
  Ethelfred, King of Northumberland, ii. 284
  Ethelgar, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Ethelnodus, Archbishop, iv. 96
  Ethelred, King, iii. 384――iv. 94
  ―――― 2nd, King, ii. 61
  ―――― King of the Mercians, history of, i. 200 _bis_
  ―――― King of the West Saxons, i. 240. Buried at Wimborne 200
  Ethelwin, St. Bishop of, i. 290
  Ethelwold, Bishop, reproved St. Udith, iv. 93
  Ethelwulf, i. 240
  Ethy, iv. 158
  Eton college, ii. 149. First provost of, iii. 255
  ―――― school, character of, ii. 243, 244
  Eubates, i. 192
  Eure river, Yorkshire, iv. 79
  Eurex in Normandy, iv. 116
  Europe, iii. 310. Tour of 87
  Eury, St. ii. 272
  Eusebius, his Chronicle, iv. 148
  Evall, St. parish, i. 143, 404――iii. 139, 161, 175, 335
  EVALL, St. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, land tax, saint, i.
    407. Trethewoll 408. By Editor, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 409
  Evans of Landrini in Wales, iii. 187
  Eve, i. 409
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 309, 315――iii. 43, 195
  EVE, St. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, saint, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, ancient state, manor of
    Trebighe, knights hospitalers, i. 410. Trebigh 411. By Tonkin, Hay,
    name of parish, Trebigh, Bickton. By Editor, saint, church 412.
    Patron, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 413
  Eve’s enchantment, ii. 102
  Every, Rev. Nicholas of St. Veep, iv. 114. His death 115
  Evyland manor, ii. 197
  Ewald, St. son of Ethelbert the 2nd, his history, i. 407
  Ewan, St. parish, iii. 18
  Ewe, St. manor, i. 418
  ―――― parish, ii. 105, 115――iii. 198, 202, 207, 451――iv. 117
  EWE, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, i. 413. Patron, incumbent, land tax, name, saint,
    murder of St. Hugh by the Jews, consequent persecution of that
    people 414. Lanhadarn 415. Tregonan, Halliggon, Trevithick 416.
    Treluick, by Tonkin, patron, Pelsew, Trelisick, Precays 417.
    Tregonan, Treworick, St. Ewe manor, Lanewa 418. Heligon, Coran,
    Lanhedrar, Lower Lanhedrar, Trelean, Rosecorla, Trelewick, Tregian,
    Pensiquillis, Lithony, Borew 420. Tregenno, Levalra, Penstruan,
    church 421. Monuments, gentry removed, Tremayne family 422.
    Statistics 423. Rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 424
  Ewny parish, ii. 258 _bis_, 284
  ―――― St. chapel, ii. 284
  Ewyn, i. 212
  Ex river, i. 342 _bis_
  Excavation at Pendeen, ii. 284
  Exceter Brygge, iv. 255
  Exchequer, iv. 20 _bis_
  ―――― court, pleas of the crown in, iii. 442
  ―――― records, iii. 139――iv. 138
  ―――― rolls, iii. 140
  Exeter assizes, ii. 293
  ―――― bishop of, i. 15, 116, 135, 209, 231, 243, 250, 367, 377, 386,
    387, 392, 396, 397, 407, 409――ii. 3, 6, 24, 50, 51 _quin._, 52, 54,
    57, 61, 62, 70 _bis_, 92, 104, 106, 115, 116, 130, 141, 144, 203,
    204, 258, 260, 265, 299, 302, 309, 315――iii. 1 _quat._, 5, 40, 60,
    110, 111, 141, 175, 177, 179 _bis_, 180, 181, 210, 224, 231, 254,
    257, 267, 268, 332, 354 _bis_, 370, 373 _bis_, 428, 441, 443――iv.
    44, 47, 53, 116 _bis_, 152, 164 _bis_, 185.――His royalties proved,
    iii. 2.――William Brewer, his history, i. 130. Peter Courtenay 373.
    Peter Quiril 300. Walter 251.――Bartholomew, ii. 415. Edulphus 7.
    Frederick 58. Leofric 69, 203, 211, 212, 215. Walter 69. Gervase
    Babington 7. William Brewer 95. Walter Brounscomb 96. John Grandison
    96, 341. Keppell 224. Peter Quiril 412. Dr. John Ross 224. Walter de
    Stapledon 143. John Voysey 195. Dr. Ward 4. William Warlewast
    87.――William Brewar, iii. 182. William Buller 301. William Carey 4,
    271. William Cotton 233. Peter Courtenay 181. Dr. Fox 141. John de
    Grandison 2. Hall 79. George Lavington 3. Dr. Redman 142. John Ross
    300. Edmund Stafford 446. Sir Jonathan Trelawnny 295, 296, 297
    _bis_. Robert Warlewast 456, 457. Stephen Weston 46. Thomas 2 _bis_.
    William, 2.――Carey, iv. 166. Walter Brounscomb 2
  ―――― bishops, consistory of, iii. 181
  ―――― bishopric of, ii. 95, 113
  ―――― canonry, iii. 460
  ―――― canons of, iv. 66 _bis_――Rev. J. Grant, iii. 40. Rev. John
    Rogers 54, 77, 445. Nicholas 60
  ―――― cathedral, i. 130――ii. 265, 341――iii. 182, 233, 258 _bis_, 309, 373
  ―――― chancellor of, iii. 269.――Rev. John Penneck, ii. 217
  ―――― church, i. 349――ii. 61――iii. 320, 363, 367 at, iii. 309
  Exeter city, i. 59 _bis_, 88 _bis_, 284, 342 _bis_――ii. 76, 189,
    190, 191, 224, 299――iii. 25, 96, 160, 364――iv. 184.――Insurrection
    in, i. 296.――Bishoprics of Cornwall and Kirton removed to, ii. 61,
    69. Defence of against Perkin Warbeck 189. Cornish rebels march to
    195. Siege of 196. Relieved 197. Rev. J. Smyth died at 286.――Reduced
    by Lord Berkeley, iv. 14. St. Boniface educated at 126. Isaac’s
    Memorials of 111.――Guildhall of, iii. 309. Members of parliament
    for, John Buller 249. Mr. Kekewitch 19. Charles Trevanion steward of 199
  ―――― college, Oxford, ii. 71, 111, 116, 130, 141, 143, 144, 221,
    224, 228, 233, 265, 281, 307, 355, 389――iii. 50, 51, 67, 84, 141,
    152, 155 _bis_, 156, 167, 171 _ter._, 408――iv. 144, 145
  ―――― dean of, Edward Trelawney, ii. 230 _bis_――John Arundell, iii. 141
  ―――― dean and chapter of, i. 129, 236, 242, 344, 366――ii. 253, 256,
    275――iii. 171, 177, 179, 257, 258, 313, 316, 332, 426 _bis_,
    427――iv. 66, 67, 118, 121, 157, 159
  ―――― deanery, i. 130
  ―――― diocese, iii. 307.――Its registry, ii. 348――iii. 257, 316, 332
  ―――― Domesday, iii. 353
  ―――― Joseph de, i. 325, 326, 342 _bis_.――Walter de, iv. 111
  ―――― market, i. 79
  ―――― Marquis of, iv. 97.――Henry Courtenay, i. 64, 65――ii. 375
  ―――― name, iii. 458
  ―――― road from, i. 20
  ―――― see of, i. 130, 231, 403――ii. 70――iii. 271, 456. Transferred
    there 415
  Exmouth, i. 169
  “Extent of Cornish acres,” iv. 7, 15, 24, 41, 67, 96, 112, 153, 162
  ―――― of all the parishes in Cornwall from Mr. Hitchins’s
    measurement, Appendix I. iv. 177
  Eyans of Eyanston, i. 142
  Eynesbury, i. 99. Hunts, ii. 263

  Fairfax, i. 44.――Sir Thomas 143――iv. 74
  ―――― the parliamentary general, iii. 81. Hopton’s surrender to 189
  Fairs, custom of displaying a glove, iii. 309
  Fal, Fale, or Fall river, ii. 356――iii. 210, 361, 403, 404. Part of
    it stopped up 405――iv. 117
  Falemuth, by Leland, iv. 288
  Falgenne, ii. 1
  Fall, James, i. 268
  Falmouth borough, iii. 8. United with Penryn 99
  ―――― district, i. 346
  ―――― harbour, i. 26, 359――ii. 1, 24, 48, 275, 276 _bis_, 281 _bis_,
    357――iii. 180, 189, 190, 207, 224, 231, 395, 404――iv. 70, 72, 75,
    84.――Its breadth, extent, numerous arms and traffic, ii. 17.
    Description of 1. Pleasant country around and fine timber 2. Greeks
    fetched tin from 3, a hundred sail may lie at anchor in, without
    seeing each others maintops 3. Rhymes upon 3, 17. One of the best in
    the kingdom 16. Most advantageous station for packets, but inferior
    in accommodation for larger ships to Plymouth or Portsmouth 18.
    Extraordinary story of a boat driven from 320, 324.――Stone sent to
    London from, iii. 63
  ―――― Lord, i. 20, 310――ii. 117. Buys Trelisick 33.――Viscount, iii.
    215 _bis_, 217, 220.――Earl of, ii. 357――iii. 74, 189, 220, 221――iv.
    5.――For six days only, John Robarts, ii. 379.――Lady, iv. 167
  ―――― parish, i. 136――ii. 97. Rocks of St. Feock similar to those in 35
  FALMOUTH parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ii. 1.
    Dismembered from Budock 15th Charles Second, Sir Peter Killigrew
    having built a new church 3. Rectory, patron, first rector, church
    consecrated, incumbent, rector’s house and garden, pulpit cloth,
    manors and seats, Arwinike 4. Town 8. Pendennis castle 12. By Tonkin
    15. Arwinick 17. By Editor, harbour, Fox family 18. Irregular trade
    with Lisbon 19. Known to the ancients, various names ascribed,
    British name Smithike, story of Pennycumquick, church dedicated to
    King Charles 20. Town extended northward, new houses convenient,
    beautiful villas, sends in conjunction with Penryn two members to
    parliament, statistics, present rector 23. Geology by Dr. Boase 24
  Falmouth river, iii. 405
  ―――― town, ii. 17――iii. 16, 96, 121, 189, 228, 305――iv. 72,
    229.――Incorporated by Charles Second, contained only five houses
    within the memory of persons living, new name first recorded when it
    had increased to five or six hundred, opposition to John Killigrew
    building the town, ii. 8. Memorial to the king, referred to Sir
    Nicholas Hals, his answer and reasons 9. King approved the project,
    Mr. Killigrew continued his buildings, inhabitants enriched, market
    10. Chief inhabitants, custom house officers, gave the title of earl
    to Charles Lord Berkeley, of viscount to George Fitzroy, son of
    Charles the Second, and to Hugh Boscawen, of Tregothnan 11. Fortunes
    made by irregular commerce 19. Road to 104. From London 344. Road to
    Marazion from 215.――Passage to Truro from, iii. 226. Road from
    Helston to 63. From Truro 304.――Has the same mayor as Truro, iv. 77,
    84. Has more inhabitants than Truro 85
  Fanhope, Lord, iii. 27
  Fann, i. 172
  Fanshaw of Basill, Robert, i. 201
  FARABURY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, ii. 48. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax 49. By
    Tonkin, patron and incumbent ibid. By Editor, smallest parish in
    Cornwall, consolidation of benefice, situation of church, name,
    statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase 50
  Farnabie, Thomas, his origin, parentage and history, iv. 86. A
    royalist, monument to in Sevenoak’s church, his works, Boyle’s
    character of him, dedicated his Horace to Prince Henry, and
    favorably received by him 87. Thomas, of London, carpenter, his
    father, and the mayor of Truro his grandfather 86
  Farnham, Nicholas de, i. 290.――Mr. iii. 236
  Farrabury parish, iii. 232, 236
  Fast, ii. 82
  Fasti, iii. 297
  Fatal Curiosity, a tragedy, ii. 102
  Fatwork Mine, i. 227, 230
  Faustine, i. 206
  Fawey, by Leland, iv. 276
  Fayrer, Rev. Joseph, iv. 47
  Felicia, Wife of Guy, Earl of Warwick, iv. 114
  Felicitas, Sancta, iii. 339
  Fenterwarson, village, ii. 405
  Fenton, ii. 1
  ―――― Berran, iii. 322
  ―――― East and West, i. 199
  Fenton Gymps of Fenton Gymps, Joan, iii. 324 _bis_. John, John,
    John, John 323. John 324 _bis_. Ralph 323. Family 323
  ―――― Gymps manor, iii. 323, 324. Account of 322
  ―――― Gymps Veor, iii. 322, 324 _bis_
  ―――― Gymps Vyan, iii. 324 _ter._
  ―――― Vease, iii. 319
  Fentongellan, i. 116
  Fentongimps, i. 243
  Fentongollan family, iii. 208, 209
  ―――― manor, iii. 182, 189, 208, 212 _bis_, 215, 221, 464. Account of
    by Hals 209. By Tonkin 210. By Lysons 214. House 221. Gone 212.
    Hals’s description lengthy 213
  Fentonwoon, account of, ii. 405
  Fentrigan, or Ventrigan Manor, iv. 127
  ―――― downs, races at, iii. 35
  Feock parish, ii. 280, 298, 309――iii. 170, 306――iv. 90
  ―――― St. ii. 24. His wife and children 25
  FEOCK, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient name, value of benefice, patronage, incumbent, land-tax, the
    saint, his figure in the church window, ii. 24. Dwelling of Captain
    Penrose, his history 25. Tregew 30. Cornish tongue spoken there till
    1640, administration of the sacrament in Cornish 31. Lanyon’s
    alms-houses 32. By Tonkin ibid. By Editor, Trelisick ibid.
    Killiganoon 34. Feock Downs, Come to Good, statistics and Geology 35
  Feock’s, St. by Leland, iv. 272
  Ferabery, Feraberry or Ferabury, iv. 66, 68
  Ferint ab Erbyn, ii. 50
  Ferrar, i. 199
  Ferrers, William de, iii. 165. Mr. 134.――Family, i. 151――ii.
    313――iv. 47, 137. De 258. Arms 134
  ―――― of Newton Ferrers, Devon, arms, iii. 134
  ―――― of Tutbury castle, Staffordshire, family and arms, iii. 134
  ―――― Earl, Henry and Wakelyn, ii. 89
  Festing, Rev. C. G. R. of Paul, iii. 290
  Feversham church, iii. 114
  Fielding, i. 57
  Figtree, in Gwithian churchyard, ii. 150
  Filley parish, ii. 281, 357――iii. 416
  Finch family, ii. 67.――Judge, iii. 144
  Fincher, Rev. Mr. of Dulo, i. 317 _bis_, 318 _bis_.――Rev. Mr. of
    Veryan, iv. 118
  Finisterre, Cape, iii. 218
  Firbisse, Dudley, iv. 146
  Fish, habits of, ii. 265
  Fishal bay, i. 236
  Fisheries, St. Ives famous for, iii. 261. Especially for pilchards, ib.
  Fitz, ii. 71
  ―――― of Fitzford, i. 347.――Near Tavistock, Sir John, iv. 41
  Fitz-Geoffrey, Charles, i. 315
  Fitzgerald, Lady Anne, and Charles Earl of Kildare, i. 297. Earls of
    Kildare 34
  Fitzhamon, Robert, Earl of Carbill in Normandy, ii. 344
  Fitz-Harry, Reginald, i. 203. Earl of Cornwall 296, 36――iii. 456, 463
  Fitz-John, Margaret and Richard, iii. 149
  Fitz-Roy, George, Viscount Falmouth, and Earl of Northumberland, and
    his arms, ii. 11.――Reginald, Earl of Cornwall, iv. 82 _ter._, 84
    _ter._ A charter from 83
  Fitz Walter, i. 170――ii. 292
  Fitz Warren family, ii. 415
  ―――― Warren, Foulk Bourchier, Lord, i. 170
  Fitz-William, Elizabeth, iii. 303. Sir John 302, 303.――Mabile, iv.
    26. Robert 103 _bis_. Roger 26
  ―――― of Hall, Elizabeth, ii. 409, 410. Gervase, Sir John, _bis_,
    Robert, William, _bis_, 409. Family 409. Arms 410
  Flambard, Ralph, Bishop of Durham, and Lord Treasurer, ii. 290
  Flamborough head, iii. 10
  Flammock, etymology of name, i. 85. Thomas 86 _bis_.――The rebel,
    iii. 388.――Hanged, i. 87. William and his arms 85
  Flammock of Bodmin, i. 387
  ―――― of Gomronson, i. 392. John 387
  ――――’s rebellion, history of, i. 61, 86, 369――ii. 188. His rebels 187
  Flanders, i. 195, 335――iii. 143――iv. 157
  ―――― war, iv. 116
  Flandrensis, Richard and Stephen, i. 104
  Flavell, Rev. T., of Mullion and Ruan Major, monument to, iii. 258
  Fleet prison, iii. 268
  Fleet street, London, iii. 251
  Flemanck, Mark le, i. 86
  Flemen family, iii. 78, 80, 90 _bis_, 94
  Flemming family, descent, i. 104.――Family, ii. 292
  Fleta, ii. 6
  Fletcher, Rev. J. R., of Quethiock, iii. 373
  Flete, Thomas, iii. 247
  Flintshire, ii. 65
  Flood, i. 260
  Flora, goddess, ii. 165
  Floyd, ii. 320――iii. 168, 394, 429 _bis_――iv. 13.――His dictionary,
    iii. 403
  Flushing, in Mylor parish, packet station removed from Falmouth to,
    ii. 11
  ―――― in Nankersy, iii. 227, 231. Description of, improved by Mr.
    Trefusis 227. Now going to decay 228
  Fonnereau, Thomas, his history, ii. 358.――An adventurer, iii. 423
  Fontevrault, in Anjou, i. 341
  Fooda village, ii. 405
  Foot of Treleyassick, Friend, John and Sarah, ii. 55
  Foote, Mr. i. 205.――John, of Truro, ii. 121.――Rev. T., vicar of
    Leskeard, iii. 21.――Samuel, ii. 90 _bis_. His first publication was
    a domestic tragedy 90
  ―――― of Lambesso, i. 207. John 204 _bis_. Henry 204 _bis_. Samuel 204
  ―――― of Tregony, i. 204
  Foow of Tiverton, i. 172
  Forbes, Rev. Mr. a miser, i. 317
  Forrabury rocks, ii. 274
  Forrester family, iii. 9
  Forschall, Rev. Josiah, iii. 408
  Forster, Rev. Benjamin, account of, and letters published by Mr.
    Nichols, i. 71
  Fortescue, Mr. i. 36, 283. Family 391.――The parliamentary colonel
    and governor of Pendennis castle, ii. 14. John 185 _bis_. Appointed
    sheriff of Cornwall, assaulted St. Michael’s Mount, but was repulsed
    184. Family 77. Rev. George, of St. Mellian 167.――Rev. George, of
    Pillaton, iii. 348. Hugh, ancestor of Earl Fortescue 216. Sir John,
    Lord Chancellor 191. Martin, acquired Buckland Filleigh by marriage
    148. Miss 163. Mr. 193.――Colonel, iv. 185
  ―――― of Devon, Mr. ii. 251
  ―――― of Fallowpit, Devon, Elizabeth, ii. 339
  ―――― of Filleigh, Hugh, i. 205. Family 387.――Hugh, ii. 68.――Arthur,
    iii. 191
  ―――― of Pencoll, Arthur, i. 387
  ―――― of Vallapit, ii. 190
  Forth, Earl of, iv. 186
  Foss, i. 10
  Fosses Moor, ii. 121
  Fossiliferous slate, i. 343
  Four Barrow Down, ii. 317
  Fowey borough, its franchise, ii. 412.――Represented several times by
    the Rashleighs, iv. 107. Jonathan Rashleigh, M.P. for 101, 107.
    Philip 108. William 109
  ―――― church, i. 52; or Foy, Mr. Treffrye contributed towards its
    erection, ii. 43
  ―――― harbour, ii. 36, 39, 409, 412――iv. 23; or Foye, ii. 88
  ―――― mines and Lanescot Consols, iv. 110
  ―――― parish, ii. 92, 413――iv. 110, 158
  FOWEY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    impropriation, ancient chapel at, tutelary saint, her history by
    the Editor, ii. 36. Her body found 37. Church and tower, town,
    franchise, incorporation, form of writ, arms, markets and fairs,
    liberties of the Cinque Ports, had sixty tall line of battle ships
    temp. Edw. 3, 38. Assisted in the siege of Calais, grew rich by
    French prizes, afterwards turned pirates, town burnt and
    inhabitants massacred by the French 39. Again obtained letters 40,
    and relapsed into piracy, insulted King Edward’s messenger, and
    were punished, beauty and security of the harbour, blockhouses, an
    engagement between them and a Dutch frigate 41. Plase, Treffreye
    family, chief inhabitants of the town, hospital endowed by Mr.
    Rashleigh, the history of his fortune 44. By the Editor, remarks
    on the above, feudal supremacy of Tywardreth priory, right of
    voting 45. Manor, Rashleigh family, Mr. Austen’s works, Lysons’s
    account of the repulse of the French 46. Mr. Rashleigh’s
    collections and writings, letter of Thomas Cromwell, the brothers
    Lamb 47. Statistics and Geology 48
  Fowey river, i. 172 _bis_, 179 _bis_――ii. 91, 379 _bis_, 390,
    391――iii. 24 _bis_, 25 _bis_, 121, 262.――Or Foye, iv. 29, 30 _bis_,
    111, 155. Or haven 110.――Choked, iii. 25, 26.――Ford across, iv. 30.
    Source of 237
  ―――― road, iv. 32
  ―――― tower, iv. 229
  ―――― town, ii. 39, 41, 44, 45 _quat._, 48, 400, 411――iii. 20, 26,
    67, 71, 219――iv. 36, 38, 99, 107, 187, 188.――Collector of customs
    at, ii. 47. Once a mere village 412.――Road to, iii. 439.――By Leland,
    iv. 290.――Or Foye, ii. 88. Siege of 40
  ―――― Robert de Cardinam, Lord of, iii. 27
  Fowler, ii. 51
  Fox, the parliamentary captain and governor of Pendennis castle, ii. 14
  ―――― Messrs. their iron-works and character, iii. 305
  ―――― Miss, of Deal, iii. 159
  ―――― of Par, T. W. family, first settled there, removed to Falmouth,
    ii. 18
  ―――― Acts and Monuments, i. 233――ii. 195――iii. 210.――His
    Martyrology, ii. 193
  Foxworthy, Mr. iv. 74
  Foyefenton, i. 199
  Fraddon, i. 388
  Frampton, J. A. iii. 293
  ―――― castle, iv. 228
  France, i. 214――ii. 40, 59, 64, 86, 108 _bis_, 123, 244――iii. 121,
    133, 142, 150, 171, 187, 400, 401, 453, 464――iv. 169.――Court of, i.
    311. Kings of 335.――Peace between England, Holland, and, ii. 43.
    Tobacco sold cheap in 43. Protestants of, are Calvinists 74. St.
    German’s remains restored to 78. Pronunciation in 127. St. Dye a
    native of 133. War with 254.――Lord Hollis ambassador to, iii. 148.
    Fear of invasion from 97. Wars with 439.――Trade of Looe with, iv.
    36. Wars between us and 24, 144
  Francis, St. i. 81 _ter._, 82 _ter._, 175 _ter._, 176 _ter._――iii.
    19.――His history, i. 80. Written by St. Bonaventure 81
  Franciscans, i. 79, 176, 312.――iv. 73. Francis de Exeter said to be
    one 111. (_See Friars_)
  Franks, i. 411
  Freathy family, ii. 252
  Frederick, Emperor, i. 130
  Frederick 2nd King of Castille, i. 311
  French architecture, iv. 140
  ―――― court, ii. 188
  ―――― crew, surprise a Cornish party at a Christmas supper, and carry
    them into Brittany, iv. 24
  ―――― family, iii. 276
  ―――― fleet, ii. 245, 246. Seized the town of Marazion 171. Appeared
    in Plymouth sound 246
  ―――― invasion, ii. 40
  ―――― king, ii. 171――iii. 130
  ―――― language, iii. 20
  ―――― men, iv. 99, 157; and Spaniards, sea fight with 21
  ―――― people, claim the appearance of St. Michael, ii. 172
  ―――― power in India, Pondicherry the chief seat of, iv. 11
  ―――― prizes, ii. 39 _ter._
  ―――― revolution, and Editor’s opinion upon, ii. 247
  ―――― wars, ii. 27, 94, 276――iii. 111, 183――iv. 101.――Edward 3rd’s
    ii. 39. Henry 5th’s 176
  Frendon, Gilbert de, iii. 354
  Friars, Augustine, or Black Friars mendicant, i. 83. Carmelite, or
    of the blessed Lady of Mount Carmel ibid.
  ―――― Cistercian or white, i. 83
  ―――― Dominican, i. 83
  ―――― Franciscan or Cordelier, i. 79, 80, 81, 82, 311 _bis_, or
    mendicant 82. History of their founder 80. Manner of living 82.
    When they came into England, their first convent here at
    Canterbury 83
  Friars of St. Francis of Paula, i. 83
  ―――― Mendicant, number in England, i. 83
  ―――― observants, i. 82
  Frignis, Gregory, mayor of Truro, iv. 77
  Friscobard, Amery of, i. 338
  Froissart, ii. 176
  Frost, William, mayor of Exeter, ii. 189
  Frowick, i. 53
  Froyns, taken by the English, ii. 177
  Frye, Rev. P., of St. Winnow, iv. 159
  Fueran, cell at, iii. 331
  Fulford, Sir Thomas, ii. 189
  ―――― Rev. John, of Probus, iii. 181
  Fuller, i. 108, 109
  ――――’s Gloucestershire, ii. 198
  ―――― Worthies, iii. 277
  Fullford, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Fulton river, or canal navigation, iv. 17
  Funeral monuments, cross-legged figures on, iii. 132
  Furley, Rev. Samuel, of Roach, iii. 396, 399. His character 399
  Furnace, reverberatory, introduced into Cornwall, i. 365
  Furneaux abbey, i. 320
  Furzdon of Devonshire, Mr. iii. 228
  Furze rock, iv. 29
  Fuschia adolphina, iv. 182
  ―――― apetela, iv. 182
  ―――― coccinea, iv. 182
  ―――― conica, iv. 182
  ―――― globosa, iv. 182
  ―――― gracilis, iv. 182
  ―――― maxima, iv. 182
  ―――― robertsia, iv. 182
  ―――― virgata, iv. 182
  Fust castle, iv. 228
  Fyning manor, iii. 206

  Gabriel, angel, i. 367
  Gaisford, Rev. Thomas, Dean of Christ Church, ii. 266
  Gaius, i. 335
  Galfridus Monmouthensis, i. 337, 397――iii. 79.――His Chronicle, ii. 50
  Galilee, iv. 100
  Gall, Henry, married Thomasine Bonaventure, his death, iv. 133
  Galleford or Camelford, ii. 402
  Gallia, i. 214――iv. 116
  ―――― Celtica, i. 107
  Galsworthy of Hartland, Mr. ii. 347
  Galton borough, ii. 162
  Games, John, iii. 83
  Gandi, Peter, iv. 28
  Gannell creek, i. 246. Account of 249
  Gardiner, Elizabeth, and Stephen Bishop of Winchester, ii. 194
  Garganus, mount, ii. 172
  Garlenick in Creed, iii. 454
  Garles, _see Grylls_
  Garnegan, i. 215
  Garrows, i. 415
  Garsike, by Leland, iv. 264
  Gascoign wine, iii. 182, 248
  Gascoigne, i. 338――iv. 145
  Gauerygan, account of, i. 224
  ―――― of Gauerygan, i. 224. Arms 225
  Gaul, i. 107 _bis_, 294――ii. 131
  Gaulis, Marianne, iii. 231
  Gaulish forests, i. 333, 336
  Gaunt, John of, iii. 65
  Gaurigan, ancestor of Charles Bodville, Earl of Radnor, iv. 73
  Gaveston, Piers, i. 338
  Gayer of Araler-Grace, Samuel, i. 256
  Gazania rigens, iv. 182
  Geach, i. 10
  Geake, Mr. iii. 42
  Gear, account of, i. 364
  Gedy of Trebersey, Richard, iii. 337 _bis_. Family 337
  Gee, Rev. Walter, of Wick St. Mary, iv. 136
  Geenlow, i. 344
  Genefre, St. ii. 430
  Genesis, book of, iii. 69
  Genesius, St. ii. 86
  Geneva, iii. 188
  Genevour, wife of King Arthur, iii. 337
  Genis, John, ii. 423
  Genlyn, account of, i. 365
  Gennis, St. Manor, ii. 87
  Gennis, St. parish, ii. 232――iii. 275, 352, 353.――or St. Gennys, ii.
    234, 273
  GENNYS ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, incumbent, impropriator, ii. 86. By Editor, the
    Saint, Treveeg by Mr. Lysons ibid. Arms of the Yeo’s, manor of St.
    Gennis, Lord Rolle’s manor, Treworgy, Braddon family 87.
    Statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 88
  Genoese, Sir H. Killigrew, Ambassador to, ii. 372
  Gentleman’s Magazine, ii. 295――iv. 141. Communication to, respecting
    Tywardreth priory 104
  Geographers, ancient, vague and uncertain, ii. 19
  Geological society of Cornwall, ii. 100 _ter._――Instituted by Dr.
    Paris, Dr. Boase secretary to, iii. 95. Transactions of 11――iv. 166
  Geology, Dr. Boase on, iii. 95, 100.――Principles of, ii. 47――iii. 57
  George, William, iii. 387
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 75, 112, 304, 351, 431――iii. 62, 135, 201――iv.
    21, 157
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 303, 407――iii. 28, 62, 367――iv. 21, 107
  ―――― 3rd, i. 157――ii. 158――iii. 106, 219, 235, 249.――His accession,
    i. 321.――Bells rung by the same men at his coronation and jubilee,
    iv. 18
  ―――― 4th, King, iv. 18
  ―――― St. i. 157
  ―――― St. island, iv. 26
  George’s, St. channel, i. 234, 289, 407――ii. 48, 145, 182, 237, 273,
    282, 283, 340――iii. 253, 280, 430
  Geran, i. 413
  Gerance, parish, ii. 5, 275
  Gerandus, St. ii. 51
  Geranium, iv. 182
  Gerans, parish, ii. 275
  GERANS parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ii. 50. Value
    of benefice, endowment, saint, patron, incumbent, land tax, seats,
    Tregeare 51. Dispute for its possession 52. Judge Dolben 53.
    Treligan, Rosteage, Trewince 54. By Tonkin, tenure, Nosworthy
    family, Trewithian, Trelegar 55. The Beacon, Tregaliavean, Rosteage
    56. By Editor, Rosteague ibid. Trewince, prospect from church,
    Bowling Green, endowment of church, Polskatho, Pettigrew, Nanquitty,
    Tregeare 57. Trewithian, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 58
  Gerard, Fitton, Earl of Macclesfield, i. 67
  Gereon, St. ii. 51
  Gerint ab Erbyn, i. 338. Elegy upon, ib. King Arthur’s admiral 404
  German accession, iii. 216
  ―――― court, ii. 407
  ―――― custom of trying after execution, iii. 186
  ―――― line of English Princes, ii. 244
  ―――― ocean, iii. 11
  ―――― Protestants are Lutherans, ii. 74
  ―――― sea, ii. 27
  ―――― soldiers driven from Charlestown to St. Ives by the wind, ii. 268
  ―――― St. ii. 59, 60. His history, bishop of Auxerre, heresies of the
    Arians and Pelagians 63. He came over to refute the Pelagians,
    succeeded, preached at St. Alban’s 64. Victory obtained by his
    prayers 65
  German’s, St. abbey, ii. 60; or monastery 61, 62. Abbot of 62
  ―――― bishoprick, ii. 60
  ―――― chapel at St. Alban’s, ii. 65, 75
  ―――― creek, i. 32――ii. 363――iii. 436
  ―――― Lord, iii. 39.――Earl of, ii. 234
  ―――― manor, iii. 2
  ―――― parish, i. 343――ii. 87, 118, 361, 362, 363, 364 _bis_――iii.
    118, 119, 124, 167, 245, 275, 371, 436 _bis_, 440
  GERMANS, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rectory, chancel, ii.
    59. Abbey, once the cathedral see 60; afterwards collegiate
    church, derivation of the word abbat 61. Hircanus the Levite,
    value of the priory, borough 62. Election of members, writ, arms
    of the priory, market and fair, history of saint 63. Priory-house
    65. Eliots 66. Seats, Bake, Coltdrynike, Millinike 67. Hendre,
    Catchfrench 68. By Tonkin, town, first return to parliament 68.
    Elective franchise, sometimes called Cuddenbeck; the priory by
    Browne Willis 69. Eliot family 70. Priory-house 71. Seat of a
    suffragan bishop to Exeter, advowsons and impropriation 72. By
    Editor, saint’s celebrity, doctrines of Pelagius 72. Saint’s
    history 73. Various places in Britain dedicated to him,
    improvements at the priory 74. Statute for suffragan bishopricks,
    Bake, Mr. Moyle and his works 76. Aldwinick, Catchfrench, Sir John
    Eliot’s quarrel with Mr. Moyle 77. Statistics 78. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Clicker Tor, and Trerule foot 79
  German’s, St. priory, ii. 70, 75, 123, 361, 362――iii. 245, 253,
    336――iv. 69 _bis_.――Prior of, ii. 59, 118, 119 _bis_, 365――iii. 336
  ―――― town, iii. 268. The Cornish see removed to 415
  Germanes, St. by Leland, iv. 281
  Germanus, St. his history by the Editor, ii. 72. His victory
    explained, came a second time to Britain 74. Converted a pagan army,
    his death and burial, and places dedicated to him 75
  Germany, ii. 407 _bis_――iii. 285. Persecution of the Protestants in
    67.――St. Boniface undertook to convert, iv. 126 _bis_
  ―――― the apostle of, iv. 126
  Germayn’s, St. by Leland, iv. 291
  Germo, ii. 126
  Germocus, St. by Leland, iv. 264
  Germoe, King, his throne, i. 125
  ―――― parish, iv. 89
  ―――― people of, ii. 82
  Germow parish, i. 118 _bis_――ii. 169
  ―――― St. said to be an Irish king, his tomb and chair, ii. 81
  GERMOW, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, Godolphin Ball,
    ii. 80. By Tonkin, Godolphin Ball ibid. Name of parish, saint 81. By
    Editor, Hals’s history of St. Gordian, tradition of St. Germoe,
    village of Bojil, William Lemon 81. Process of mining 82. Mr.
    Lemon’s mine at Trowell 83. Gwennap mines, Cavnon adit, a present
    from Frederick Prince of Wales to Mr. Lemon 84. Lemon family 85.
    Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 85
  Gernigan, Anne and Sir Henry, iii. 140
  Gernon, Geoffrey de, ii. 209
  Gernow, i. 300
  Geron’s, St. iv. 274. By Leland ibid.
  Gerrance, i. 26
  Gerrans parish, iv. 117 _ter._, 124
  Gerrard, Sir William, ii. 235
  Gerras mines, i. 20
  Gerry, Rev. Mr. ii. 319
  Gerson’s parish, ii. 281
  Geruncius, King of the Britons, ii. 50
  Gervasius, St. i. 99
  Gerveys, Elizabeth and John, ii. 396
  Getulius, a Roman citizen and martyr, iv. 117
  Ghent, ii. 127, 345
  Giant, story of a, ii. 113
  Giant’s hedge, description of, iv. 29
  Gibbon’s account of the Paleologi, ii. 368
  Gibbs, Dr. James, his Life, ii. 111
  ―――― of St. Colomb, i. 396
  Gibson, Captain Charles, R. N. ii. 375 _bis_
  Giddy, Rev. Edward, i. 362. Catherine ibid. Davies 363.――Edward,
    iii. 97. His character 93. Arranged the cabinet of the Cornish
    Geological Society 100. Rev. Edward, the Editor’s father 159, 337.
    John, memoir of 273. Thomas, his character 96. Family 94
  ―――― of Trebersey family, iii. 39
  Gifford family, ii. 153 _bis_.――Mr. Bishop’s assumed name, iii. 143
  ―――― of Fewborough family, iii. 222
  Giggy, St. ii. 254. His well ibid.
  Gilbart, John, iv. 55
  Gilbert, Davies (the Editor), i. 363――iv. 148.――Catherine, his
    daughter, ii. 100. Wife of Grenville 341. Family 189.――C. S. iii.
    151.――His History of Cornwall, i. 234――iii. 151.――Rev. R. P. of St.
    Wenn, iv. 151. W. R. 97
  ―――― of Crompton castle, i. 134
  ―――― of Tacabre, i. 134. Samuel 133, 134.――Of Tachbear, in
    Bridgerule, Samuel, iii. 235. Family 23――iv. 45, 62
  Gilpin, Mr. iii. 166
  Giraldus Cambrensis, i. 305, 337
  Githa, i. 168.――Wife of Earl Godwin, ii. 415.――Of Godwin, Earl of
    Kent, iv. 155
  Glamorganshire, ii. 216――iii. 281.――Mr. Daniel’s smelting-house in,
    ii. 33.――Supplied Cornwall with steam-engines, iii. 305
  Glant parish, ii. 36――iii. 425――iv. 99
  GLANT parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ii. 88. Ancient name,
    value of benefice, endowment, patron, vicar, impropriation,
    land-tax, Penevit 89. By Tonkin, name, etymology 90. By Editor,
    Hals’s History of St. Sampson, ib. Penquite, Lentyon, a castle,
    name, first boarding-school for young ladies, peculiarities of the
    church, statistics 91. Incumbent, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 92
  Glanvill, Judge, i. 206. Miss 43, 245.――Mr. ii. 59
  ―――― of Catchfrench, Francis, i. 244
  ―――― of Killyvor, John and Mary, i. 221.――Family, iv. 160
  Glanville, Francis, ii. 77 _bis_. Rev. John 234. Family vault in
    Kilkhampton church 352. Family 231, 339.――Frances and William E.
    iii. 219
  Glaseney college, iii. 224. At Penryn 194.――Glasney, ii. 341, 96
    _bis_. Of canons regular 136. Provost of 113――iv. 1, 2. Its founder
    2.――Glassney, Robert Lyddra, provost of, iii. 257
  ―――― monastery near Penryn, iii. 446.――Glasseney, ii. 286
  Glasgow, i. 247
  Glasney, John de, i. 246
  Glasnith i. 209
  Glastonbury, i. 306, 337 _bis_――ii. 305――iv. 36
  ―――― abbey, iii. 262――iv. 25. Its dissolution 37. Michael, abbat of 26
  ―――― church of, iv. 26
  ―――― monks of, iv. 26, 27
  ―――― John of, i. 307
  Glebridge manor, account of, ii. 375
  Glenning, Nicholas, i. 113
  Glesnith, by Leland, iv. 271
  Glin, i. 168 _bis_. Account of 171 _bis_
  Globularia longifolia, iv. 182
  Gloucester, i. 113――ii. 76 _bis_
  ―――― Bishop of, William Warburton, ii. 265
  ―――― cathedral, cenotaph to the Rev. J. Smyth in, ii. 278
  ―――― Duke of, Richard, afterwards King, made sheriff of Cornwall,
    ii. 185
  ―――― earls of, ii. 148.――William, i. 266, 288.――William,
    illegitimate son of King Henry 1st, and Robert, his son, ii. 148
  ―――― hall, Oxford, now Worcester college, ii. 233. Its Fasti ibid.
  ―――― honour of, ii. 147, 341
  Glover, Rev. William, ii. 147 _bis_――Rev. William of Phillack, iii.
    344 _bis_
  Glover’s Somersetshire, iii. 186
  Gluvias parish, i. 135 _bis_――ii. 2, 129, 337――iii. 59, 224,
    231――iv. 1. Rev. G. Allanson, vicar of 95
  GLUVIAS parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, church before the
    Conquest, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, ii.
    92. Land-tax, seats, Roscrow, Innis, Gosose river and house, Penryn
    borough, the Ocrinum of Ptolemy, antiquity of manor 94. Charters,
    elective franchise, markets, fairs, arms, form of writ,
    insignificance in Carew’s time, subsequent improvement 95. College
    of Black Canons at Glasnewith 96. Inhabitants of Penryn, Lady
    Killigrew’s cup 97. By Tonkin, Enis, ib. Roscrow 98. By Editor,
    etymology, St. Gluvias, borough of Penryn, Enis, Cosawis, Bohelland
    farm, story of “Fatal Curiosity”, 100. Parish fortunate in clergy,
    beauty of situation, dangerous road remedied 104. Statistics, vicar,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 105
  Gluvias, St. ii. 99
  Glyn, John, i. 215. Family 261
  Glynford, i. 172
  Glynn barton, i. 172, 173, 298
  ―――― Dr. Robert, his learning, ii. 153. Held in high respect at
    college, entertained Mr. Pitt 154. Thomas 142. Family 153. Arms
    142.――Jane, iii. 247 _bis_. John murdered 246. John 247, 248 _bis_.
    Thomasine 248. Miss 279. Family 23, 246. Arms 249
  ―――― of Glynn, Denny, i. 172. Edmund and John 173. Nicholas 171.
    Serjeant 173 _bis_. William 172. Family 173, 305. Arms 172.――Thomas,
    ii. 397 _bis_. Family 142, 339, 383, 397 _bis_. Property 397
  ―――― of Glynford, Nicholas, i. 172
  ―――― of Heliton, i. 173
  ―――― of Helston, ii. 339
  Glynne of Polkinhorne, Thomas and William, ii. 137
  Gnaphalium ericoides, iv. 182
  ―――― fetidum, iv. 182
  ―――― stœchas, iv. 182
  Godalgar, etymology, i. 119
  Godfrey, Charles and Charlotte, iii. 217
  Godollon castle, iv. 228
  Godolphin administration, ii. 217
  ―――― Ball, account of by Hals and Tonkin, ii. 80
  ―――― barony, i. 127
  ―――― blowing-house, i. 394
  ―――― earldom, i. 127
  ―――― Sir Francis, i. 123 _ter._, 232, 394 _bis_, 395 _ter._ Francis,
    Earl of 126, 127. Francis, Lord, and Henry 127. John 122 _bis_. Mary
    127. Sidney 59. Sidney, Earl of 123 _bis_, 126 _quat._, 232, 234.
    William 123 _quat._ Sir William 123, 232. Pedigree to the Earl 123.
    From the Earl 126. Family 74, 125, 160, 224, 225, 262 _bis_. Arms
    124. Property 127.――Catherine, ii. 217. Francis 217, 269. Sir
    Francis 9. Sir William 170. Miss 236. Duke of Leeds, heir of 218.
    Family 80 _bis_, 160, 170, 217 _bis_. Patrons of Helston 160. Arms
    335. Monuments and curious inscription on one 219.――Family, iii. 8,
    47 _bis_, 286――iv. 54, 173.――Saying of, iii. 295. A branch of
    57.――Lord, ii. 83, 139, 162, 219
  ―――― of Godolphin, Thomas, recorder of Helston, ii. 160.――John, iii. 211
  ―――― of Treveneage, iii. 81
  ―――― of Treworveneth, family extinct, Colonel William, iii. 288
  ―――― hill, i. 128 _bis_.――Hills, ii. 85
  ―――― house, i. 395
  ―――― lands, i. 119, 121. Etymology 119, 120
  Godrevy, account of, ii. 150
  ―――― point, i. 166――ii. 151
  Godwin, Bishop, i. 130. His catalogue of English Bishops, iii. 415
  ―――― Earl, i. 168――ii. 415.――Of Kent, iv. 155 _bis_, 156
  Godwyn sands, iii. 310
  Golant parish, ii. 390
  Gold, the largest pieces in Cornwall found in Ladock parish, ii. 355
  Golden, Goulden, Gowlden, or Gulden manor, iii. 355, 356, 360, 361,
    365, 464
  ―――― parish, iii. 383
  Goldingham, i. 247 _bis_
  Goldney family, ii. 341
  Goldsithney village, iii. 308. Tale of a fair removed to 309
  Goldsmith, Lieut. R.N. removed the rock at Castle Treryn, iii. 31
  Goldsmith’s rents, London, iv. 86
  Goliah’s sword, i. 334
  Gomronson, account of, i. 392
  Gonnet’s, St. park, iii. 397
  Gonrounson, i. 387
  Gonwallo parish, iii. 127, 128; or Gonwallow, ii. 80, 237
  Gooch of Orford, Suffolk, G. W. iv. 130
  Good Hope, Cape of, iii. 187
  Goodall, Mr. ii. 43
  ―――― of Fowey, John, ii. 98.――Family, iii. 162
  Goodere, Captain, Dineley, Sir Edward, Sir John, i. 204.――Sir J. D.
    Captain Samuel, whose history is tragical, and was published by
    Foote, his nephew, and Miss, iv. 90
  Goodwood, i. 372
  Goodyere, Anne, iii. 159
  Goonhilly downs, i. 304――ii. 331 _bis_――iii. 127, 128, 138
  Goonwyn, ii. 254
  Gooseham village, iii. 255
  Goran manor, iii. 90
  ―――― or Gorran parish, ii. 330――iii. 195, 198, 202, 207
  GORAN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value of
    benefice, patron, impropriator, incumbent, land-tax, church, prior
    to the Conquest, remarkable places, Goranhoane, Bodrigham, ii.
    106. Family of that name 107. Escape from Bosworth, Bodrigan’s
    leap 108. Discord with the Haleps of Lammoran, Tregarden,
    Tregarthyn family 109. Arms, Trewoolla 110. Family 111. Dr. James
    Gibbs 111. Anthony Wills 112. By Tonkin, etymology, saint 112.
    Trevennen, Trevasens, Polgorror, Treveor, Pennore, Thicavosa,
    story of a giant 113. Situation and description of church, Lady
    Brannell’s tomb, Richard Edgecombe’s monument 114. By Editor,
    Trevascus, Treveor, Bodrigan ibid. Statistics, vicar, patron,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, Deadman point 115
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 414
  Goran-carhayes, i. 413
  Goranhoane, account of, ii. 106
  Gordian, St. account of, ii. 81
  Gordon, Lady Catharine, ii. 186, 191. Perkin Warbeck’s wife,
    pensioned by Henry 7th 191.――Sir A. C. iii. 9
  ―――― St. church, ii. 80
  Gorges, Sir William, i. 348 _bis_
  Gorian, St. a persecutor converted, ii. 112
  Gorien, or Coren, St. a missionary from Ireland, ii. 113
  Goring, general, i. 113. Lord, the royalist general, iii. 81――iv.
    115, 187
  Gorseddan, i. 192
  Gosmoor, i. 220 _bis_
  Gosose, account of, ii. 94, 100
  ―――― creek, ii. 94
  ―――― river, ii. 94
  Gospels, ancient copy of, iii. 408
  Gotherington manor, i. 64――iii. 436
  Gothian, St. ii. 147
  Gothic architecture of Henry 7th’s reign, iv. 81
  Gothland, i. 336
  Gothlois, Earl of Cornwall, etymology of name, iv. 94
  Gothlouis, Duke of Cornwall, i. 324, 327 _quat._, 328 _quat._, 329
    _bis_, 331 _quint._, 332 _bis_, 342. His death 331, and funeral 332
  Gould, John, iii. 42
  ―――― of Downs, William, iii. 249
  Gove of Devon, Elizabeth, iii. 176 _bis_
  Goverigon, ii. 217
  Govill, iii. 402――iv. 117
  Gower, Rev. G. L. of St. Maben, iii. 74. Of St. Michael Penkivell 221
  Goynlase in St. Agnes, iii. 319
  Graas, ii. 292
  Grace, St. iii. 364. Her skeleton ibid.
  Grade parish, ii. 358 _bis_――iii. 128, 257, 421, 423
  GRADE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, ii. 116. By Tonkin, etymology
    and value of benefice ibid. By Editor, etymology, Erisey ibid.
    Advowson of living, feast, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    Cadgwith, quarry at Cogar, Kennick cove 117
  ―――― St. ii. 116 _bis_
  Graffo hundred, Leicestershire, ii. 363
  Graham, Thomas, and Mr. ii. 47.――Rev. H. E. of Ludgian, iii. 54
  Grammar, Farnaby’s system of, iv. 87
  Grampont, iv. 30
  Grampound borough, account of, i. 253, 256, 258, 259――iii.
    395.――Arms, i. 254.――Philip Hawkins, M.P. for, iii. 356, 367. Thomas
    Hawkins 362
  Grampound, town, iii. 360, 371
  Grand Junction canal, iii. 10 _bis_
  ―――― jury, charge to, ii. 76
  Grandison, John de, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 1, 372 _bis_,
    373.――Demanded legacies for endowing churches, ii. 96. Used his
    influence in aid of Bideford bridge 341.――His register, iii. 1
  ―――― John Villiers, Earl of, i. 69
  ―――― Viscount, father of the Duchess of Cleveland, ii. 11
  Granite sent from Penryn to London, i. 242
  Grant, Rev. John of Lezant, iii. 40. Mr. Canon, rector of Ruan
    Lanyhorne 405. Mr. 404
  Grantham, ii. 76.――St. Symphorian and St. Wolfran buried at, iv. 117
  Granville, Sir Bevill, i. 113.――Colonel, ii. 93.――Sir Bevill, iii.
    40. His great victory 351. His death 40. Grace, and John Earl of
    Bath 255. Family 353. Saying of 295
  ―――― of Penheale, Degory, i. 419
  ―――― of Stow, Margaret and Roger _bis_, i. 419
  ―――― Grace, Countess of, and Robert Carteret Earl of, ii. 346
  Graunpond, by Leland, iv. 272
  Graves, Thomas, i. 37.――J. iv. 38
  ―――― Lord, i. 37――ii. 252
  Gray, the poet, i. 71. Mr. 384
  Gray’s Inn, ii. 267
  Great Mystery of Godliness, iii. 79
  ―――― Work mine, ii. 83, 304 _bis_
  Grebble, Mr. iv. 74
  Greece, iii. 187.――Emperor of, ii. 365 _bis_――Artists of, iv. 169
  Greef islands, iv. 237
  Greek church, ii. 370, 371
  ―――― college, ii. 371
  ―――― empire, ii. 373
  ―――― language fashionable in England, ii. 373.――Tables of, iv. 87
  Greeks, i. 341――iii. 395.――Acquainted with Falmouth harbour, ii. 19.
    And fetched tin from it 3
  Green bank, Falmouth, i. 137
  Greenough, Mr. iv. 124
  Greenwich, ii. 223, 359, 399――iii. 281, 375, 376
  ―――― East, ii. 56
  Greenwich observatory, the first meridian, ii. 222
  Grees, Germaine, iv. 77
  Grefe by Leland, iv. 289. Islet by Leland and trajectus 274
  Grege, William, iii. 16
  Gregor, Francis, ii. 393.――Rev. William, iii. 113. Mrs.
    406.――Francis, iv. 77, 89, 121, 129. William 123. His analysis of
    Veryan limestone 123, 124. Family 74, 89, 128, 130
  ―――― of Cornelly, i. 204
  ―――― of Gurlyn, account of, i. 349
  ―――― of Tredinike, Francis, i. 243, 244 _sex._ John 243, 244. Miss
    244 _bis_. Rev. William ibid.――Family, iii. 112
  ―――― of Trewarthenick, Mr. ii. 407.――Francis, iii. 315 _bis_, 318
    _ter._ His ancestors 318. Mr. 54.――Family, ii. 407
  ―――― of Truro, ii. 93――iii. 327
  Gregory, Mr. ii. 146
  ―――― Pope, ii. 203, 212
  ―――― St. Pope, ii. 288
  ―――― 1st, or the Great Pope, iii. 284, 285――ii. 287. His letter
    preserved 288
  ―――― 9th, Pope, i. 312
  ―――― 13th, Pope, founded a college for Greek children at Rome,
    opposed the Greek errors, his calendar, ii. 370
  Gregov, M^c, i. 365
  Grenfell, Pascoe, ii. 216. Pascoe, jun. notice of ibid.
  ―――― of Marazion, Emma, ii. 224
  Grenville, Anne, and Rt. Hon. Bernard, ii. 98. Bernard, sheriff of
    Devon 341. Bernard, father of Sir Beville and Sir Richard 348 _bis_.
    Sir Bevill 31. Sheriff of Cornwall 186. Sir Beville 333 _ter._, 334.
    Registry of his baptism 348. Sold Lanew and Bryn 332. His letter to
    Sir John Trelawny 349. His character 343. By Editor 348. His death
    in the battle of Lansdowne 343. Epitaph to 347. Poetical 348.
    Charles 351. George, sheriff of Devon 341. George, M.P. for
    Cornwall, rhyme on his election, created Lord Lansdowne, a poet, his
    imprisonment and death 351. Grace, Countess Granville 346. John 342.
    Sir John, afterwards Earl of Bath 333, 345, 350. Dispossessed Noye
    by unjust litigation of an estate sold to him by Sir Bevill 333.
    Instrumental to the restoration, created Earl of Bath, &c. 345.
    Built the mansion at Stowe 346, 351. Earls of Bath 340. Richard,
    sheriff of Cornwall, and Richard, sheriff of Devon 341. Richard,
    descended from Rollo, Duke of Normandy, came over with William the
    Conqueror 344. Sir Richard, vice-admiral 342. His battle with the
    Spaniards, and death 344. Sir Richard 342. Registry of his baptism
    348. Called by the rebels Skellum Grenville, imprisoned, Clarendon’s
    unamiable character of him, his death 345. Robert, sheriff of
    Cornwall 341. Roger, Capt. R.N. 341, 344. Lost in the Mary Rose
    frigate 342. Sir Theobald promoted the building of Bideford bridge
    341. William, Archbishop of York, son of Sir Theobald 344. Family,
    by Lysons, settled at Bideford 341. Possessed the manor of
    Kilkhampton nearly from the conquest 343. Under a temporary eclipse
    350. Monuments 347.――Sir Richard, trait of, iii. 184 _bis_. Miss 60
    _bis_.――Sir Richard, his siege of Plymouth, raised by Essex, he
    retreated, was followed, re-inforced by the King, iv. 185. Quartered
    with the King at Lord Mohun’s house 186. With other generals hemmed
    in Essex, and obliged him to retire 187. Family 16, 136――i. 262
  Grenville of Bideford, John, sheriff of Devon, ii. 341. Richard 344
  ―――― of Ilcombe, ii. 346
  ―――― of Penheale, George, i. 378.――Degory, ii. 110
  ―――― of Stow, Roger, i. 313. Family 17, 19.――Thomas, sheriff of
    Cornwall, probably the first of Stowe, ii. 341. Family 109, 332
    _bis_. Sir Bernard 22, 162. Sir Bevill 22. His birth and death 162.
    Unhorsed in the battle near Stratton 13. Sir John 172. Family 162
    _bis_
  ―――― of Stowe, Bucks, family, iii. 192, 194
  ―――― of Trethewoll, i. 408
  ―――― Lady, present possessor of Boconock, i. 69. Lord 69, 112
  ―――― Duke of Buckingham, iii. 192
  Greston-moor, iii. 41
  Grey, Thomas, Duke of Dorset, iii. 294. Thomas, Marquis of Dorset
    350. Henry, Duke of Suffolk 294 _bis_. Heir of the family
    140.――Family, i. 383
  ―――― Lord, ii. 197
  Greynville, Rev. Mr. ii. 414
  Gridiron, explanation of St. Lawrence’s, i. 89
  Griffin, Colonel, i. 68
  Griffith, William, ii. 426
  Grills, Charles and Rev. Richard, ii. 394
  Grogith, i. 243, 244
  Grose, Mr. ii. 387
  Gross, Mr. iii. 82
  Grosse, Ezekiel, i. 162. William 136. Family 145, 162――ii.
    217.――Miss, iii. 248. Mr. 383. Family 390. Arms 249
  ―――― of Comborne and Golden, Ezekiel, iii. 212, 215, 243, 361, 406,
    427, 463. His daughter 215, 361, 406, 427, 463 _bis_
  Growden, Lawrence, iii. 175
  Groyne, packet boats from receive their despatches at Falmouth, ii. 11
  Gryllo, Rev. William, i. 288
  Grylls or Garles, rocks at, iii. 23
  ―――― Rev. R. G. i. 128. Matthew and Robert 8.――Alice, ii. 396.
    Charles 227, 396 _ter._ John 396 _bis_. Richard and Rev. Richard
    396. Rev. R. G. 395, 396. Thomas 218. Mrs. 228. Family
    395.――Christopher, iii. 260. Rev. R. G. of St. Neot’s 262, 266.
    Restored the church 262, 264. Rev. Mr. of Luxilian 57. Family
    113――iv. 54
  ―――― of Court, Charles, ii. 395
  ――――  of Helston, Rev. R. G. ii. 124. Thomas 218
  ―――― of Tavistock, William, ii. 395
  ―――― manor, iii. 23
  Guary Mir, or Miracle Plays, iii. 329
  Guavis, William, iii. 284
  Gubbin’s cave, iii. 185
  Guddern, ii. 305. Account of by Hals 300. By Tonkin 303
  ―――― barrow, ii. 305
  Guerir, or Guevor, St. history of, iii. 362
  Guernsey, i. 115, 169.――Lighthouses, ii. 358
  Guilford, ii. 76
  Guillemard, Mary, Philippa Davies, i. 363
  Guinear, i. 355
  Guisors in Normandy, ii. 177
  Gulby, Slade, ii. 114
  Guldeford, Henry, iii. 206
  Gullant, by Leland, iv. 277, 290
  Gully, i. 408
  ―――― of Tresilian, Samuel and Mr. iii. 269
  Gulval parish, ii. 169, 174――iii. 46, 54, 78
  GULVAL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, manor of Laneseley, Als
    family, ii. 118. Gulval well 121. By Tonkin, Lanistley manor,
    Keneggy ibid. Etymology of parish 122. By Editor, St. Gunwall ibid.
    Ancient name, according to Whitaker, impropriation, vicarage,
    Kenegie 123. Trevailer, Rosemorron, fertility of part of the parish
    124. Chiandower, parish feast, history of St. Martin, statistics
    125. Geology by Dr. Boase 126
  ―――― register, ii. 83
  ―――― well, ii. 121
  Gumb, i. 185 _quat._ Daniel, his house cut in a rock 184
  Gundred, iii. 398. Her filial love 393
  ――――’s, St. well, iii. 393
  Gundrons, ii. 121
  Gunhilly, by Leland, iv. 288
  Gunpowder plot, iii. 361
  Gunwall, St. his history by the Editor, ii. 122
  Gunwallo, King, ii. 126
  ―――― parish, i. 118, 301 _bis_, 304――ii. 155――iii. 257
  GUNWALLO parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, etymology, ii. 126. Patron, incumbent, land tax, manor
    of Gunwallowinton 127. By Tonkin, circle of stones at Earth ibid. By
    Editor, St. Winwallo ibid. Manor of Winnington (by Lysons),
    situation of church, buried treasure, Mr. Knill 128. Statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 129
  Gunwallowinton manor, ii. 127
  Gunwin, account of, iii. 8
  Guran, i. 415
  Gurlyn, account of, i. 349
  Gurnet’s head, iv. 165
  Gurney, Rev. Samuel, i. 354.――Sir Richard, parish priest of
    Bideford, admonished in his sleep to build Bideford bridge, ii.
    341.――Rev. Samuel of St. Earth and Redruth, iii. 386. Rev. Mr. of
    St. Mervyn 177. Three in succession held St. Mervyns for above a
    century 179.――Rev. Samuel of Tregony, iv. 129
  Gurran parish, iii. 190
  Guthrun the Dane, i. 290
  Guy, Rev. Charles of Padstow, iii. 278
  ―――― Earl of Warwick, iv. 111, 114. His life 113
  Guye, i. 8
  Guzman, Don Felix de, i. 311
  Gwairnick, i. 19
  Gwarnike, i. 16. Two chapels at 17
  Gwatkin, R. L. i. 2――ii. 306 _bis_. Mrs. 306.――Family, i. 2
  Gwavas, Mr. iii. 46. Family 286
  Gwavis, William, iii. 284
  Gweek, ii. 330
  Gwellimore, King of Ireland, i. 326
  Gwenap parish, ii. 123, 222, or Gwennap 144, 306――iii. 306, 380,
    390――iv. 1, 2, 5 _bis_. Mines of 89
  GWENAP parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value of
    benefice, ii. 129. Patron, incumbent, land tax, rectory,
    remarkable places, Trefyns 130. St. Dye chapel, Paldy’s mine 131.
    Memorable storm 132. By Tonkin, tumuli at Carne mark, name of
    parish. By Editor, Saints Wenap and Dye 132. St. Dye’s history,
    Cornmarth, excavation at 133. Scornier, its rich mine, Poldice
    mine, copper in tin mines, size of church 134. Alterations,
    Beauchamp monument, tradition of monks in church tower,
    statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase, important mining
    district, beautiful porphyry near Burncoose 136
  Gwenap pit, ii. 133
  Gwendron parish, i. 221, 236――ii. 93, 155, 157, 166 _bis_――iii. 127
    _bis_, 128, 441, 442――iv. 1, 2 _ter._, 137
  GWENDRON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, impropriator, land tax, remarkable places,
    Trenethike, ii. 137. Nine maids 137. By Tonkin, endowment of
    church, patron, impropriator, Trenithike, name of parish, Bodilly
    Veor, and Vean 137. Treneare 138. By the Editor, former patron
    138. Trenethick, Nansloe, Trelil, parish very productive of tin
    139. Penhallynk monument, vicarage house, parish feast, Mr. Jago a
    magician, statistics 140. Geology by Dr. Boase 141
  Gwenwynwyn ab Nan, i. 338
  Gwernak, by Leland, iv. 262
  Gwiator, Henry, iii. 387
  Gwihter, Henry, iii. 387
  Gwillim’s Heraldry, i. 320
  Gwinear, or Gwyniar, or Guinier parish, i. 160, 344――ii. 145 _bis_,
    225――iii. 339, 344, 345
  GWINEAR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, ii. 141. Impropriator, land tax,
    remarkable places, Lanyon, Polkinhorne, Coswin 142. By Tonkin, name
    142. Impropriation 143. By Editor, productive of copper, Herland
    mine, Whele Alfred, Whele Treliston, Lanyon family 143. Statistics,
    vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase, Relistion mine 144
  Gwinnodock, St. iii. 240
  Gwinter, ii. 331 _bis_
  Gwithian bay, ii. 145
  ―――― parish, ii. 234
  GWITHIAN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, manor of Connerton,
    exchanged by Henry 3rd for that of St. James, ii. 145. Form of
    writ, value of benefice, patron, land tax 146. By Tonkin, rectory,
    patron, incumbent, etymology 146. By Editor, advowson, charter of
    Henry 2nd, manor of Conorton 147. Leland’s tradition of a large
    town, exchange of manors contradicted, account of St. James’s
    hospital 148. Lysons’s account of the inundation of sand 149.
    Planting of rushes to arrest it, sand calcareous, difficulty of
    burning it into lime, Godrevy, large fig tree in church-yard,
    parish feast, statistics 150. Geology by Dr. Boase, Godrevy
    point 151
  Gwyn, Mr. ii. 11
  Gwynn, i. 8
  Gwythian parish, ii. 141――iii. 140, 339 _bis_, 344
  Gyges, King, i. 394

  Haccombe, iii. 372. Chantry in ibid.
  ―――― Sir Stephen de, iii. 372
  Hack, John, iii. 387
  Hack and Cast, ii. 113
  Hadham, Edmund of, Earl of Britain and Richmond, iii. 65
  Hadley, John, his sextant, ii. 222
  ―――― in Suffolk, ii. 372
  Hadrian’s mole, iv. 148
  Hagulstadiensis, iv. 42
  Haile’s abbey, Gloucestershire, iii. 284, 285 _bis_
  Hailestown, by Leland, iv. 268
  Hains or Hens Burrow, iii. 394
  Hakewell’s Catalogue of the Speakers, iv. 44
  Haleboate rock, iii. 361
  Halep family, ii. 357
  ―――― of Lammoran, ii. 109
  Haleps family, iii. 215
  Halewyn or Hallwyn, account of, ii. 254
  Half crowns, £10,000 in, i. 265
  Halghland, ii. 430
  Haligan or Helligon, account of, iii. 65
  ―――― Robert de, iii. 66
  Halisworthy hundred, i. 133
  Hall barton, iii. 293――iv. 29, 31
  ―――― Bishop of Exeter, iii. 79. Mr. 280
  ―――― manor, iii. 293.――Account of, ii. 409. Walk at 410
  Hallabeer village, iii. 255
  Hallamore, Mr. ii. 97
  Hallet, Mr. iv. 22
  Hailing, Kent, ii. 152
  Hallton, account of, i. 312, 315
  Hallworthy, iii. 136
  Hals, Dr. i. 298. Lieut.-colonel James 113. John, Bishop of Lincoln
    or Litchfield and Coventry 218. Family 224.――Jane, ii. 119. John
    119, 120 _ter._ Simon 118, 119 _ter._ William 118. Family 118.
    Pedigree 119.――Anne, iii. 188. Grenville 187. Henry, memoir of 187.
    James, governor of Montserrat, taken prisoner at Plymouth 183. His
    life spared, suffered a rigorous imprisonment, verses given to him
    184. His marriage 186, and issue 186, 187. James 186. Wasted his
    property 187. John, Bishop of Lincoln or Litchfield and Coventry
    141. Nicholas 187. Thomas 186. His death 187. Thomas, memoir of
    187――William, the writer of this book, i. 216――ii. 56, 57, 86, 90,
    97, 99 _ter._, 116, 153 _bis_, 143, 147, 148, 163, 199 _bis_, 201,
    238, 256, 269, 273, 274 _bis_, 279, 281, 284, 305, 363, 411――iii.
    187, 62, 66, 90, 106, 126 _quint._, 135, 137, 160, 165, 166 _ter._,
    172, 184, 196, 213, 214 _quat._, 216, 221, 238 _bis_, 398, 432, 433,
    434――iv. 143, 25, 96, 138 _bis_, 139, 165.――His MS. ii. 127. Of
    Ladock parish lost 352.――Upon creeds, iii. 426. His mistakes 352.
    His parochial history 96. The MS. lent to the Editor 407.――Does not
    notice the Scilly Islands, iv. 168. His Cornish vocabulary 37, 39.
    On the vocabulary system 72. Granvill hall 74. The missing portions
    of his MS. sent to the Editor 184.――Family, iii. 208
  Hals of Efford, Anne, i. 221. John 419. Matthew 221. Richard 419.
    Family 298.――John, ii. 130
  ―――― of Efford and Fentongollan, John, i. 125. Sir Nicholas 125 and
    136. Nicholas 39.――Family, ii. 109
  ―――― of Fentongollan, i. 65. John 346, 356. Sir Nicholas 356.――John,
    ii. 170. Sir Nicholas 119, 170. Governor of Pendennis castle,
    sanctioned the building of Falmouth 9. His letters and reasons
    copied 10. Son of John of Efford, and his death 13. Family
    170.――John, iii. 209 _bis_, 212, 215, 464. Sir Nicholas 183, 212,
    215. Captain William, memoir of 183.――John and Sir Nicholas, iv. 2
  ―――― of Hals’s Savannah, Jamaica, Thomas and Major Thomas, ii. 120
  ―――― of Hungerford park, Berks, James, iii. 186
  ―――― of Kenedon, Richard, i. 313, 419――ii. 189――iii. 116
  ―――― of Lelant, i. 144 _ter._
  ―――― of Merthyr, James, i. 205; or Merther, James, ii. 30, 32, 111.
    Martha his wife 111. His eldest son, ii. 32.――Lieut.-col. James,
    iv. 188
  ―――― of Pengersick, Sir Nicholas, obtained a pardon for Lady
    Killigrew, ii. 6
  ―――― of Trembetha, John, iii. 7
  ―――― of Tresawsen, memoir of James, iii. 182
  ―――― of Truro, Grenville, i. 205
  Halse, James, M. P. ii. 271.――James, iii. 91
  Halsey, Rev. Joseph, i. 205.――Family 417. Edward, Joseph, M.D. and
    Nathaniel, iii. 188
  ―――― of Huntingdonshire family, iii. 188. Arms ibid.
  ―――― Rev. Joseph, of St. Michael Penkivell, iii. 188 _bis_
  Halsham, Yorkshire, ii. 118
  Halton, i. 311. John de, Bishop of Carlisle 313
  ―――― of Hallton, Joan, i. 313 _bis_. Richard 313
  Halvose, iii. 113
  ―――― John, iii. 181
  Halwell, Sir John, ii. 189.――Family, i. 348
  Halwyn manor, iii. 313
  Ham, John, iv. 18
  Hambley of St. Columb, i. 259
  Hambly, Rev. William, of St. Mewan, iii. 196
  Hamelin, presbyter of Launceston castle chapel, ii. 427
  Hamilton, Duke, i. 66, 67, 68.――Mr. iii. 62
  Hamley, Sir John, ii. 250.――Mr. iii. 65. Family 195. Arms 65
  ―――― of St. Neots, ii. 320
  ―――― of Trebithike, Mr. iv. 95
  Hamly of Trefreke, John, i. 383
  Hamlyn family, ii. 316
  ―――― of Curtutholl, iii. 170 _bis_
  Hammett of Carmarthenshire family, iii. 256
  Hammond, Anthony, ii. 76
  Hamm’s castle, Normandy, the Earl of Oxford confined there, ii. 185
  Hamoaze, i. 266――ii. 362――iii. 45, 105, 108 _bis_
  Hampden, John, memorials of, ii. 349. Lord Nugent’s life of 77.――The
    rebel, iii. 144
  Hampshire, ii. 282――iii. 10, 145
  Hamson, Sir Thomas, i. 171
  Hancanon, Richard, i. 215
  Hancock, Rev. Mr. of St. Martin’s, near Looe, iii. 119
  Hancock of Hendreth, William, ii. 68
  ―――― of Pengelly, in Creed, Thomas, iii. 202
  Hankey, Warwick, iv. 157
  ―――― of Trekininge Vean, Joseph, i. 225
  Hans towns, ii. 6
  Hantertavas, account of, iii. 62
  Hardenfast manor, iii. 346
  Hardfast, i. 313
  Hardwicke, Earl of, Chief Justice, i. 269, 282, 283. His charge on
    the western circuit 278
  Hardy, John, ii. 209
  Hare of Trenowith, i. 406. Arms ibid.
  Harewood, i. 158. Sir W. Trelawney lives at, iii. 301
  Harleian MSS. iii. 154 _sex._
  Harlyn, John de, i. 373
  Hamington, Gervase de, iv. 41
  Harold, Edmund, Geoffrey and Thomas, iv. 146
  ―――― King, iii. 130, 142
  Harpsfield, i. 382――iii. 277
  Harrington, a notorious pirate, ii. 41
  ―――― Gervase de, ii. 128
  ―――― of Somersetshire, Miss, ii. 278
  ―――― William Bonville, Lord, iii. 294. Elizabeth, Lady; Lord, of
    Harrington, and his daughter ibid.
  Harris, William, i. 164. Family 197, 365.――Edward and Jane, ii. 304.
    John 58. Mary 416. Richard 255. Susanna 304. William sheriff of
    Cornwall 56. Mr. 416. The celebrated Mr. of Salisbury 103. Rev. Mr.
    253. Arms 122.――W. S. of Plymouth, his writings on lightning, iv.
    130.――Edward, iii. 103. John 82. William 103. Mr. 20. Family 83, 90
  ―――― of Curtutholl, iii. 170 _bis_
  ―――― of Hayne, Sir Arthur, ii. 122. William 121, 123.――Sir Thomas,
    iii. 103
  ―――― of Kenegie, William, iii. 85.――In Gulval, ii. 212. Christopher
    121, 123. Lydia 282
  ―――― of Park family, i. 205.――In St. Clement’s, Samuel and Mr. iii. 382
  ―――― of Pickwell, William, i. 244
  ―――― of Roseteague, Richard, ii. 56
  ―――― of Rosewarne in Camburne, ii. 39. Mr. 56
  ―――― of St. Stephen’s, iv. 161
  Harrison, Rev. T. H. ii. 347
  ―――― the historian, ii. 403
  ―――― of Mount Radford, Devon, family, ii. 294
  Harrow school, ii. 243
  Hart, Dr. i. 370.――Family, ii. 255
  Hartland abbey, i. 168.――Devon, ii. 413, 414 _bis_, 415 _bis_――iv.
    155, 156.――Account of, ii. 415. Abbats of 414. Prior of 49 _bis_
  ―――― Galfrid de Dynham, Lord of, iv. 156
  Hartley Winchcombe, i. 164. Henry Winchmore, ii. 56. Winchmore 139
  Harvey, Mr. i. 254.――John, iii. 341 _bis_, and his son 341
  Harwich, ii. 28
  Harwood in Calstock, ii. 230
  Hastings, a cinque port, ii. 38. Enlarged 45.――Sands, iii. 10
  ―――― family, iii. 234, 353――iv. 136 _bis_, 143
  ―――― Earl of Huntingdon, i. 378 _bis_
  Hatch, Samuel, i. 275. Family 270, 271, 274
  Hatsell’s Parliamentary Precedents, i. 356
  Hatt, i. 105
  Haulsey, Elizabeth, i. 399. John 400
  Haweis, David and Edward, ii. 307. Reginald 307 _bis_.――David, iii.
    382. Reginald 327 _bis_. Family 382, 383
  ―――― of Kelliow, Reginald, iii. 381. Mr. 382
  Hawes, John, iii. 387.――Mr. iv. 74. Family 4
  ―――― of Carlyan, ii. 302
  ―――― of Chincoos, Thomas, ii. 316. Arms 316
  ―――― of Kea, ii. 316 _bis_
  ―――― of Killiow, John, his arms, ii. 300
  Hawke, Mr. iv. 111
  Hawker, Rev. Jacob, iv. 19
  Hawkey, Joseph, ii. 415. Family 152.――Miss, iii. 116.――Joseph, iv. 139
  ―――― of St. Colomb, Joseph, ii. 253, 254
  ―――― of Trevego, Martha and Reginald, iii. 187
  ―――― of St. Wenowe, ii. 90
  Hawkins, i. 54, 243, 391, 407. Christopher 357 _bis_, 358, 364. Sir
    Christopher 8, 46, 258, 358, 392, 403. Henry 45, 259 _ter._ Jane
    357. John 274, 275, 357 _quat._ John and John Heywood 358. Dr. John
    417. Rev. John and Joseph 259. Mary 357, 364. Philip 357 _ter._
    Thomas 356, 357 _quat._, 358. Rev. Mr. of Blissland 259. Family 54,
    243, 391, 407. Arms 45.――Sir Christopher, ii. 148, 354, 358. His
    opinion of Ictis 20, 206. Rev. Mr. 258, 260. Family 281.――Sir
    Christopher, iii. 271 _bis_, 423. His discovery and working of a
    lead and silver mine 272. John 270. Rev. John, D.D. 268, 381. Of
    Pennance 356, 362. Rev. Dr. 196. Mary 367. Philip 268, 271, 354,
    356, 367. Rev. Mr. of Sithney 441. Mr. a pupil of Dr. Borlase 53.
    Mr. his paper on Geology 100. Family 197, 363.――Rev. Mr. Towednack,
    iv. 53. Family 161
  Hawkins of St. Austell, Barbara and Henry, i. 376. Grace 419, 422.
    Henry 419, 423
  ―――― of Creed, i. 45, 346, 387
  ―――― of Gonrounson, i. 392. Philip 387
  ―――― of Helston, i. 45. John 260 _bis_.――Thomas, iii. 113
  ―――― of Pennance, Ann and Barbara, i. 259, 260. Elizabeth 55, 259,
    260. George 259. Gertrude and Grace 260. Henry 259 _ter._ Jane 259.
    John 255, 260. John, D.D. 257, 259 _bis_. Mary 259 _bis_. Philip 55,
    255 _bis_, 257, 259 _bis_, 350. Arms 255.――Ann and Philip, ii. 242.
    Family 217
  ―――― of Pennemer, John, D.D. i. 418
  ―――― of Penzance, Mary, iii. 136
  ―――― of Trewinard, i. 356, 364, 366 _bis_. Christopher 259, 350.
    Thomas 346 _bis_, 349, 356, 357. Arms 349.――Christopher, iii. 136,
    196. Christopher of Helston and 367. Jane 136.――In St. Earth, and
    Trewithan in Probus, Sir Christopher, ii. 217
  ―――― of Trewithan, Christopher, iii. 368 _bis_. Henry and John 368.
    Philip 368 _bis_. Thomas 362, 368 _ter._ Miss 368
  Hawksley, Rev. J. W. of Redruth, iii. 390
  Hawkyns, Sir John, iv. 86
  Hawley, ii. 292. Dr. 233
  ―――― of Dartmouth, John, ii. 294
  Hawtys Brygge, iv. 255
  Hay, i. 187. Account of 411――ii. 353, 354
  Haydon, Mr. schoolmaster at Leskeard, iii. 18. Determined the
    longitude of Leskeard 19
  Hayford haven, iii. 74, 110
  Hayle, i. 359, 364 _bis_――ii. 83, 214
  ―――― causeway, iii. 386
  ―――― harbour, improved, iii. 341
  ―――― parish, iii. 339, 342, 343
  ―――― port of, ii. 261, 264
  ―――― river, i. 344, 350, 359, 377――iii. 5, 6, 125, 128, 339, 426.
    Estuary of 5, 11
  Hayleford channel, i. 236
  Hayman, Richard, iv. 18
  Hayme, Isabel, iii. 324. John 315, 324
  Hayne, in Devon, ii. 122 bis
  ―――― of Treland, John, ii. 320
  Haynes burrow, ii. 1
  Headon village, iv. 41
  Heale, Mr. ii. 151, 228, 319.――Miss, iv. 129――Family, i. 28, 107,
    177. Arms 107
  ―――― of Battlesford, ii. 137
  ―――― or Hele of Benetts, Edmund, iv. 152. George and Lucy 152, 154.
    Warwick 154. Name and arms 152
  ―――― of Brading, Lucy, ii. 235
  ―――― of Devon, Ellis, iii. 234
  ―――― of Fleet, Honor, and Sir Thomas, iii. 225. Family 211
  ―――― of Wembury, i. 65
  Hearle, Dr. James, and Rev. Mr. i. 298. Family, ib.――ii. 99, 270
  ―――― of Buryan, i. 359, 360
  ―――― of Penryn, John, i. 423.――Mr. ii. 97. Mr. worked Poldice mine,
    and possessed one third of the lands 134. Mr. the last of Penryn 99.
    Family 354.――Betty, iii. 440. Thomas 303. Family 8
  Hearn, ii. 186
  Hearne, i. 307――iii. 332
  ――――’s Appendix to Adam de Domerham, iv. 26
  Heart, Dr. Robert, ii. 151. His arms 152.――Family, iii. 391
  ―――― of St. Germans, ii. 152
  ―――― of Manhyniet, ii. 152
  ―――― of Tencreek family, ii. 152
  Heckens family, iii. 83. Richard, of St. Ives 88
  Hector, iii. 417, 418 _bis_, 420
  Hedgeland, J. P. iii. 264 _bis_
  Hedgeland’s prints of St. Neot’s windows, ii. 396
  Hedingham castle, Essex, iii. 424
  Hedui, i. 107
  Hele family, iii. 250, and heiress, iv. 136
  ―――― of Boscome, Devon, Rebecca and Thomas, iii. 297
  Helen, Empress of Rome, i. 237
  Helena, St. iii. 187.――Mother of Constantine, ii. 153. A monastery
    built by 37
  ―――― St. island, Dr. Maskelyne’s voyage to, ii. 222
  Helfon harbour, i. 38
  Helford channel, iii. 124
  ―――― river, i. 242――iii. 63, 126 _bis_, 127, 138
  ―――― village, iii. 113
  Helie, i. 2
  Heligan, ii. 126
  Heligon, i. 424. Account of 419
  Heliotropium corymbosum, iv. 182
  Hella in Camburne, ii. 141
  Hellanclose, account of, i. 293
  Helland parish, i. 60――ii. 340――iii. 64, 74
  HELLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, antiquities,
    value, patron, land-tax, incumbent, Bocunyan, ii. 151. Barton of
    Helland, etymology of the word barton 152. By Tonkin, etymology 152.
    Saint, Gifford family 153. By Editor, etymology of barton,
    Penhargard manor, Broads barton, Glynn family 153. Statistics,
    rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 154
  Hellas river, ii. 330
  Helldon rectory, Norfolk, ii. 152
  Hellegar manor, account of, i. 264
  ―――― of Hellegar, Sibill, and arms, i. 265
  Hellesbury park, ii. 402.――Helsbury, iii. 223
  Helleston lake, iii. 442
  ―――― manor, iii. 442 _bis_
  Hellman, Miss, iii. 191
  Hellnoweth, nunnery at, iii. 126
  Helston borough, account of, ii. 156. First charter 158. Payment of
    rates 159. Patron, former representatives, letter on the reform as
    affecting it 160. Hospital of St. John 136, 137, 163. A coinage
    town 301. Coinage hall 163. Agreeable society, market house 164.
    Foray, and practice of bowling 165. Road to 215. Alexander
    Pendarves, burgess for 98. Etymology 158. Corporation 8,
    9.――Burgesses of, iii. 15. Road to Falmouth from 63. William Noye,
    attorney-general, M.P. for 152. John Rogers, M.P. 445.――Road from
    Truro to, iv. 4
  Helston castle, iv. 228
  ―――― church, ii. 136 _bis_, 192――iii. 384
  ―――― and Kerrier hundred, i. 38
  ―――― manor, i. 74
  ―――― manor in Kerrier, ii. 137, 401, and its stannaries 155
  ―――― in Trigg, ii. 137, 401, 404――iii. 223
  ―――― parish, i. 1, 3, 77, 115, 123, 136, 153, 356――ii. 140――iii. 47,
    127 _bis_, 128, 421, 441, 442, 443, 446 _ter._――iv. 6
  HELSTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, manor in Alfred’s
    days, a coinage town _temp._ Edward 1st, privileges, ii. 155. Form
    of writ, Castle-Werre, arms of the borough, Edward 1st frequented it
    for pleasure 156. Chief inhabitants, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land-tax, thunder-storm 157. By Tonkin, hospital ibid. By
    Editor, etymology, contest for elective franchise, first charter
    158. Payment of rates, election petition 159. Heraldic visitation,
    patron, representatives of borough, Reform Bill 160. Letter upon
    161. Church injured by a storm, new church, St. John’s hospital,
    removal of the coinage hall 163. Agreeable society, annual festival
    164. The foray 165. Musical air preserved from the British, and
    found in Scotland and in Ireland, statistics, and Geology by Dr.
    Boase 166
  ―――― tenants, i. 75
  ―――― village, ii. 405
  ―――― Chaumond manor, iii. 442
  Helvetians, i. 107
  Helya, prior of Glastonbury, iv. 27
  Helyar, Weston, iv. 9
  ―――― of East Coker, Somersetshire, Rachel, iii. 165. Weston 165
    _bis_, 346. Family 346
  Hemley of Trefreke, John and arms, i. 384
  Hendarsike, etymology, iv. 22
  Hender, i. 369, 370
  Hender, Elizabeth, iii. 233. John 233, 234 _bis_. Family, monuments
    to 233
  Hendersick, lands of, iii. 294
  Hendower family, iii. 198
  ―――― of Court family, heiress of, ii. 109 _bis_
  Hendra, his dream, ii. 300
  ―――― or Hendre, account of, i. 234――ii. 68
  Hendrawne, iii. 327
  Hendre, Mr. iii. 354
  Henemerdon, William de, iii. 428
  Hengar, account of, iv. 94, 98
  Hengist, i. 326 _bis_
  Hengiston Downs, iv. 6.――Abound with tin, lines upon, and a battle
    at, ii. 310
  Henlyn, iii. 177, 178. Possessors of 176, 177
  Hennaclive cliff, its height, iv. 18
  Hennah, Rev. Mr. of St. Austell, iv. 167
  Hennock vicarage, ii. 224
  Hennot, ii. 274
  Henrietta Maria, Queen, i. 398
  Henry 5th, Emperor, iii. 28
  ―――― 1st, King, i. 296――ii. 148, 239, 249――iii. 140, 332, 456, 462,
    463,――iv. 77, 82 _bis_, 169.――His daughter, i. 296
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 87, 147, 155, 170, 249, 415, 422, 426――iii. 139, 140,
    225――iv. 71, 81 _bis_, 82 _bis_, 84, 140
  ―――― 3rd, ii. 69, 89, 95, 118 _bis_, 119, 130, 145 _bis_, 149, 235,
    249, 403, 422――iii. 14, 15, 27, 140, 149, 268, 269, 316, 438――iv.
    15, 105 _bis_, 128.――His charter to Launceston Priory, ii. 426
  ―――― 4th, ii. 93, 107, 180, 235, 260 _ter._, 282, 394, 398――iii. 14,
    22, 27 _bis_, 66, 111, 117, 125, 129, 132, 134, 140, 225, 226, 302,
    307, 323, 374, 437, 438――iv. 16, 22, 43 _bis_, 44 _bis_, 68, 96,
    102, 112, 139, 153
  ―――― 5th, ii. 176 _bis_, 209, 212, 302, 386――iii. 7, 101 _bis_, 111,
    141, 269, 303, 316, 374, 436. Statue of 295――iv. 13, 101, 138, 143,
    144, 145 _bis_
  ―――― 6th, i. 169――ii. 39, 71, 89, 107, 149, 153, 182 _quat._, 183
    _bis_, 209, 235, 251, 260 _bis_, 299, 315, 335, 353, 354――iii. 101,
    116 _ter._, 141, 147, 255 _bis_, 294, 318, 323, 324 _bis_, 459――iv.
    43, 101, 132, 139, 141, 145 _bis_, 146, 156
  ―――― 7th, ii. 2, 43, 100, 108 _ter._, 109 _bis_, 114, 185, 186
    _bis_, 187, 188, 189, 190 _bis_, 191 _ter._, 235, 317, 335, 341,
    363, 386――iii. 27, 65 _bis_, 101, 102 _ter._, 103 _quat._, 104,
    134, 141, 177, 182, 193, 199, 213, 226, 324, 370, 393, 436――iv.
    45, 72, 161.――Insurrection to depose, i. 86.――Gothic architecture
    of his time, iv. 81
  Henry 8th, ii. 53, 66, 70, 71, 72, 76, 87, 91, 94, 96, 109, 113, 119
    _bis_, 123, 139, 149, 157, 163, 169, 170, 171 _bis_, 176, 185, 191,
    194, 209, 235, 259, 275, 276, 277, 327, 335, 341 _ter._, 412, 414
    _bis_, 415, 420――iii. 7, 44, 90, 103 _quat._, 104, 105, 111, 133,
    134 _bis_, 139, 147, 148, 155, 158, 163, 170 _bis_, 181, 199
    _quat._, 206, 208, 210, 211, 214, 232, 238, 253, 278, 286 _bis_,
    317, 326, 370, 417, 437, 441, 446, 453, 459, 460――iv. 9, 15, 42, 57,
    68, 69, 72, 73, 97, 101, 112, 113 _bis_, 134, 155, 156, 161.――Built
    St. Mawe’s castle, tradition of, ii. 280. A frigate sunk in his
    sight near Portsmouth 342
  ―――― Prince, iii. 14
  ―――― Prince, son of the Conqueror, ii. 211 _bis_
  ―――― Prince of Wales, iii. 27, 213.――Farnaby dedicated his Horace
    to, iv. 87
  Hensall Cove, ii. 360
  Henshinius, iii. 332
  Henwood, Mr. iii. 100.――Family, i. 420
  ―――― of Lavalsa, Hugh, i. 421
  Herald’s office, iii. 316――iv. 77
  ―――― visitation, iii. 83――iv. 106
  Heraldic visitations, ii. 338, 423
  Heraldry, extract from Upton’s MS. upon, ii. 107
  Herbert, Lady Catherine, i. 265――Jane, ii. 107. John 160 _ter._
    William, Earl of Pembroke 107
  ―――― of Cherbury, Lord, ii. 348
  Herbert’s Festivity of Saints, i. 407
  Hercules, i. 341.――Breaking the horn of Achelous, ii. 161.――Pillars
    of, iv. 168
  Hereford, Stanbury, Bishop of, iii. 255
  ―――― Cathedral, ii. 33
  ―――― and Essex, Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of, i. 63
  Herland, copper mine, i. 226――ii. 143
  Herle family, i. 125, 394, 397.――Sir John the younger, and Polglass,
    iii. 294.――Mr. iv. 74. Family 107
  Herle of Landew, Edward, his character, Mary, Nicholas, Northmore,
    his death, iii. 41. Northmore 42
  ―――― of Prideaux, Edward, iii. 41 _ter._――Family, i. 397
  Herme, St. i. 393. His history 393
  ―――― St. parish, i. 202――ii. 5
  Hernecroft in Stratton, iii. 133
  Heron, Rev. John, of Stoke Climsland, iv. 7
  Herring, Major, J. B. i. 380. His grandson 381
  Hertford, Edward Seymour, Earl of, and Duke of Somerset, iv. 107
  Hertfordshire, ii. 64, 65
  Hertland, recluse of, iv. 158
  Hervey, Rev. Mr. composed his Meditations while curate of
    Kilkhampton, ii. 352
  Herygh, St. iii. 7 _bis_
  Herys of Herys, Henry and family, iii. 202
  Hesse Cassel, Landgrave of, his bargain for letting out troops, ii. 269
  Hessenford, road from Duloe to, iv. 30
  Hewish, Matilda de, iv. 112
  Hexham, battle of, ii. 260
  ―――― cathedral, iv. 43
  ―――― diocese, iv. 42
  ―――― shire, iv. 42, 43
  Hext, Samuel, and arms, i. 44. Mr. 45.――Francis, ii. 393. Rev. F. J.
    154――iii. 66. Nicholas 83
  Hexworthy barton, account of, iii. 2
  Heydon, Mr. an ornament to the country, ii. 388
  Heyes, Thomas, i. 9
  Heylston, by Leland, iv. 288
  Heywood, Anne and James, i. 347.――Sir John’s Chronicle, ii. 198――i. 339
  Hickens, Mr. ii. 124
  ―――― of Poltair, Mr. iii. 91
  Hickes, Cloberry, i. 23. Family 368.――Mr. ii. 259――iv. 74
  ―――― of Trevithick, John, i. 416. His father poisoned ibid. Stephen,
    accidentally shot 417
  Hickman, Mr. iv. 74
  Hicks, i. 61, 62.――Mr. iv. 68
  ―――― of Trenedick, John, iii. 44
  Hicks’s Mill village, iii. 38
  Hidrock, St. ii. 379 _bis_
  Hieroglyphicks of the Druids, i. 192
  Higden, Ralph, his Polychronicon, iii. 163
  Highlands, iii. 240
  Hilarius, Bishop of Poictiers, ii. 338
  Hilary point, i. 295
  ―――― St. i. 294, 395. Bishop of Poictiers 295 _ter._――His history,
    ii. 167
  ―――― or Hillary, St. parish, i. 88, 344, 355――ii. 80, 118, 307――iii.
    46, 306, 312.――vicar of, ii. 144
  HILARY, ST. parish, Hals’s history of the saint, ii. 167. By Hals,
    situation, boundaries, name, value of benefice 169. Tregumbo,
    Treveneage, borough of Marazion, ancient name, situation, Lord,
    court leet, member of parliament, franchise neglected, fair and
    markets 170. Land tax, French invaded, and took Mount’s Bay, burnt
    the town, and fled, defeated at sea 171. History of St. Michael’s
    Mount, former name, description 172. Lines upon, pilgrimages
    performed to, disruption from main land, submarine trees, spring
    173. Another spring, prospect from the top, Porth-horne, priory 174.
    Revenues, chapel, Michael’s chair, tombstones, solidity of the roof
    175. Built of Irish oak, proprietors, privileges, fairs, roads for
    anchorage, landing of Sir Robert Knollys 176. Seized by Pomeroy, his
    confederacy with Prince John 177. Stabs the messenger sent to arrest
    him, enters St. Michael’s mount by stratagem 178. Richard’s return,
    John’s submission 179. Pomeroy surrenders, and dies, Richard
    garrisons the mount 180. Vere family, dispute between the Lords
    spiritual and temporal 181. Wars of the Roses 182. Perkin Warbeck’s
    rebellion 186. Siege of Exeter 189. Priory of St. Michael’s mount
    191. Murder of Edward the 6th’s commissioner, Arundell’s rebellion
    192. Terms sent to the King 194. His answer 195. Second siege of
    Exeter 196. Sir Anthony Kingston, provost marshall 197. Church and
    house struck by a ball of fire, wonderful escape of Mr. St. Aubyn
    Whitaker’s name of the place 199. And etymology, nunnery 200.
    Leland’s notice of it 201. Church built by Edward the Confessor 202.
    The chair 204. Its use 205. History of the mount by Editor, the
    Ictis of Siculus, earliest tradition of the church, lofty situations
    dedicated to the archangel, St. Kenna imparts virtue to the chair
    206. St. Kenna’s well, Keynsham, ammonites at, supposed ancient site
    of the mount, subterranean trees 207. Dugdale’s account 208.
    Oliver’s notices, and tanners, St. Edward’s charter 209. Earl of
    Morton’s 210. King of the Romans 211. Pope Adrian’s bull,
    suppression of the monastery, proprietor since 212. Saint Aubyns
    have improved it, geological description 213. Description of the
    buildings, pier, connection of the mount with romances 214.
    Antiquity and history of Marazion 215. Considerable families there
    216. Treveneage, Tregembo 217. Tregurtha, Ennis, Trevarthen 218.
    Mines, church and its monuments 219. Mr. Palmer a recusant 220. Mr.
    Hitchins 221. Dr. Maskelyne’s astronomical voyage to St. Helena,
    Meyer’s astronomical tables 222. Nautical Almanack 223. Family of
    Mr. Hitchens 224. Parish feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    also of St. Michael’s mount 225
  Hilary, St. term, ii. 120, 334
  Hilda, St. petrified serpents, ii. 298
  Hill, Otwell, i. 46. Family 31, 210.――Sampson and his arms, ii. 136.
    Mr. 11.――Alan, iii. 193. Candia and Grace 191. Otwell 191, 193. His
    arms 191. Rev. Mr. of St. Maben 65.――Richard, iv. 77
  ―――― of Carwithenack, i. 241
  ―――― of Constantine, ii. 139
  ―――― of Croan, John and Michael, i. 371
  ―――― of Lancashire family, iii. 191
  ―――― of Lydcote family, iii. 252
  ―――― of Shilston, Oliver, i. 348
  ―――― of Trenethick family, and John, ii. 139
  HILL, NORTH, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, principal seats,
    Trebatha, ii. 226. Battin 227. By Editor, Trebartha 228. Treveniel,
    patron, rector, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 229
  HILL, SOUTH, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    ii. 229. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, Manaton
    230. By Tonkin, name, patron, incumbents, Kellyland manor, Manaton
    ibid. By Editor, Whitaker’s etymology of Manaton, proprietors
    of Kalliland, patron, church, rector, statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 231
  Hillman, Rev. Mr. of St. Michael Penkivell, iii. 208.――Rev. Mr. iv. 1
  Hills, the highest in Cornwall, i. 132
  Hilton manor, iii. 117 _bis_
  Hingston downs, i. 152 _bis_, 159――ii. 23. Kitt hill, the most
    elevated point of 312
  ―――― hill, i. 189
  Hippesley, Cox, John and Frances Susanna, ii. 250
  Hippia frutescens, iv. 182
  Hitchens, i. 282.――Rev. Malachi, ii. 144, 221, 224, 225. The
    Editor’s notices concerning 221. Filled the office of astronomer
    royal in Dr. Maskelyne’s absence 222. Assisted in compiling the
    Nautical Almanack 223. His family, Rev. Richard, Rev. Thomas,
    Malachy, Fortescue, Josepha 224. Mr. 259, 261.――Rev. Mr. of St.
    Hilary, iii. 34. Family 286
  ―――― of Trungle, Mr. iii. 288
  Hiwis family, ii. 256.――Emmeline and family, iv. 16
  Hoare, Sir Richard, i. 305
  Hoarn, iii. 403
  Hobart, Lord, ii. 361. Family 362.――Lord, iii. 5, 405
  Hobbs, i. 18, 78――ii. 57. Nicholas and his arms 54.――Rev. Thomas,
    iii. 213. William 355
  Hobby, Sir Thomas, married a dau. of Sir Anthony Cooke, ii. 16
  Hoblin, Mr. ii. 143
  Hoblyn, i. 45. Edward 216. John 107. Robert 216. Thomas 223.――Rev.
    Carew, iii. 136. Rev. Edward of Milor 231. Mary 136. Robert 347.
    Rev. Robert 77, 445. Family 192, 197, 445
  ―――― of Bodman, i. 172, 224, 371;――or Hoblin Bridget, ii. 389
  ―――― of Bradridge, ii. 57
  ―――― of Croan, i. 371. Damaris, Edward 376 _bis_. Of Crone, Damaris
    and Edward 260
  ―――― of Egleshayle, i. 224
  ―――― of St. Enedor, i. 224
  ―――― of Gurran, i. 224
  ―――― of Helland, i. 224
  ―――― of Kenwyn, John, i. 224
  ―――― of Leskeard, i. 223
  ―――― of Nanswhiddon, i. 160, 161, 223, 371. Anne, Carew 224. Edward
    223. Francis, Grace, John, and Mary 224. Richard 223. Robert 210,
    226, 223 _bis_. Rev. Robert 223, 226. Thomas 224. Arms 223.――Family,
    ii. 113――Edward and Richard, iii. 191. Robert 191, 196 _bis_
  ―――― of Penhale, i. 292
  ―――― of St. Stephen’s, i. 225
  ―――― of Tregleagh, i. 371
  ―――― of Trewheler, Edward, i. 387
  Hocken, Rev. William, of Phillack, iii. 343, 344
  Hocker, Rev. Mr. ii. 413.――Rev. William, of St. Mewan, iii.
    198.――Thomas, iv. 3. Mr. 4 _bis_
  ―――― of Trewanta, William, iii. 39
  Hockin, Miss, ii. 221.――Mr. iii. 223. Mr. of Gwithian 344
  Hockyn of Helland and Helston, iv. 95
  Hoddy of Pennance, Henry, i. 257
  Hodgson, Rev. Charles of St. Tudy, iv. 97
  Hoe, the, iii. 108
  Holcomb, Mr. iii. 211, 212, 215
  Holden, i. 410.――Rev. Mr. ii. 232
  Holinshed, i. 108, 246
  Holland, ii. 52, 270. Coast of 28. Peace of England and France with
    42. War with 245. Tobacco sold cheap in 42.――States of, iii. 186
  ―――― of Devon, family, ii. 304
  ―――― John, Earl of Huntingdon, i. 341.――Thomas, Earl of Kent, and
    Thomas, Duke of Surrey, iii. 27
  ―――― parish, i. 264
  Hollis of Houghton, Notts., Densill Lord Hollis; Gilbert and John,
    Earls of Clare, iii. 148. Sir William, ancestor of the Duke of
    Newcastle 147 _bis_
  Holrode, Eggerus de, ii. 426, 427
  Holwell, Rev. William of Menheneot, iii. 171 _bis_. His collection
    of pictures 171. His marriage and death 172. Rev. William of
    Thornberry, Glouc. and his works 171
  Holy hearth, iii. 90
  ―――― land, iv. 43
  ―――― Trinity churchyard, i. 134
  ―――― Trinity, knights of, i. 338
  ―――― war, ii. 177――iii. 129, 132――iv. 43
  ―――― well in Roach, iii. 393
  Holyhead, i. 295
  Holywell, i. 291. Description of 292
  Homer, iii. 417, 418, 420. Mr. Peters’s Vindication of 68. Holwell’s
    Beauties of 171. A curious translation from 418. Pope’s 420.
    Compared 171.――Macpherson’s, ii. 406
  Homer well, iv. 35
  Honey, Mr. iii. 20
  Honorius, Pope, iii. 284
  Hoo, Baron, i. 224
  ―――― of Hoo, William, i. 224
  Hooker, i 108, 325. Richard 283. Robert 162 _bis_.――Mr. ii. 157, 420
  ―――― Zachariah, of St. Michael Carhayes, iii. 203. His arms 203
  ―――― of Trelisick, in St. Ewe, William and Miss, ii. 279
  Hope, Mr. i. 321
  Hopton, Lord, i. 44. Sir Ralph 113.――King Charles’s general, ii. 343
   _bis_.――iii. 17, 183, 184. Lord, the royalist general 81.
    Surrendered to Fairfax with 5000 men 189.――Sir Ralph, iv. 13, 14
    _bis_. Lord 14. His ancestor 14
  ―――― in the Hole, co. Salop, given to the Norman hunter, whose
    posterity took the name, iv. 15
  Hoquart, a French naval commander, iii. 218
  Horace, translation of, iii. 218.――Farnaby’s, iv. 87
  Horatius, a Roman tragedy, iv. 97
  Hore, of Trenowth, in St. Ewan, ii. 335
  Horestone or Orestone, iv. 28
  Hornacott manor, iv. 39, 41. A free chapel there 39
  ―――― family, iv. 41
  Horsey, Joan and Sir John, i. 65
  Horsham, Sussex, iv. 87
  Horsley, i. 183 _ter._
  Horton, prior of Launceston, ii. 419
  Hosatus or Husey, Henry, iii. 206
  Hosea, reference to, i. 80
  Hosken, Rev. Mr. ii. 89
  Hoskin, i. 364. Jochebed 363.――Rev. Mr. ii. 149 _bis_, 150. Henry 8.
    Miss, of Looe 249. Mr. and his son, Rev. Mr. mistook Schist for gold
    ore 21. Family 8.――Mr. of Whitstone, iv. 152
  ―――― of Gwithian family, and Rev. Richard, ii. 147
  ―――― of Hellanclose, i. 293. Joseph 293
  Hoskins, James, iii. 358.――Rev. Nicholas, of Boyton, and Rev.
    Nicholas of Whitstone, iv. 153. John, of East Looe, and his dau. 37
  Hospital of St. James and of St. John at Bridgewater, ii. 412; and
    of St. John Baptist, at Helston 136
  Houghter, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  House of Lords, iii. 405
  Houses, foundations of, discovered under sand, iii. 6
  Hoveden, Roger, ii. 60, 180. His Chronicle 310
  Howard, Elizabeth, and Sir John, ii. 181.――Thomas, Duke of Norfolk,
    iii. 293――Sir Charles, iv. 41
  Howeis, ii. 159
  ―――― of Redruth, and Killiou, Edward, John, Reginald, Mr. arms, ii. 304
  Howell, i. 108.――Rev. Joshua, ii. 400. Mr. 142. Rev. Mr. universally
    esteemed 104.――David, iii. 337. Rev. Mr. of Pelynt 291.――Rev. Mr.
    iv. 29. Mr. 114
  Howlett, Sir Ralph, married a dau. of Sir Anthony Cooke, ii. 16
  Howse, Richard, ii. 189
  Hoya carnosa, iv. 182
  Hoyle, copper works at, iii. 343. Iron works 305. Trade of 343
  Hucarius, the Levite, ii. 62
  Huckmore, Miss, ii. 230
  Huddy, i. 243.――Family, iii. 355
  ―――― of Nethoway, i. 257
  Hudson, the botanist, ii. 331――iii. 173
  Hugh, St. history of, i. 414. Miracles done at his shrine 415
  Hugh, St. de Quedyock, parish and church, iii. 373
  Hughes, Rev. Mr. i. 258
  Huish, ii. 292
  Hull, ii. 76
  Hume, Lord, ii. 9
  Humphrey, i. 161
  Hungerford, Robert, Lord, ii. 397.――Elizabeth, Francis, Katharine,
    Mary, Sir Robert, and heiress, iii. 234. Family 353――iv. 136 _bis_, 143
  ―――― of Penheale, i. 378 _bis_
  Hunkin, John, iii. 16 _bis_
  Hunt, George, i. 101
  Hunt of Lanhidrock, George, ii. 381. George 382, 387. His taste 382
  ―――― of Mellington, Cheshire, Thos. ii. 381
  Hunter, the Norman, his posterity called Hopton, iv. 15
  Huntingdon, ii. 76
  ―――― John Holland, Earl of, i. 341
  Huntingdonshire, i. 369
  Hurlers, i. 178, 179, 183 _bis_, 184 _bis_, 187――iii.
    45.――Descriptions of, i. 184, 196
  Hurling at St. Merryn, iii. 179
  Hurricane, November 1783, i. 318
  Hurris, iii. 202
  Hurston, i. 116
  Hussey, Richard, his Life, and Mary his widow, ii. 34. John 382,
    383. Peter 358.――Rev. John of Okehampton, Devon, iv. 90. Father of
    Richard 89. His death 90
  Hutton, George, iii. 144
  Hy or Iä, St. name explained, iv. 313
  Hy-Conalls, county of, in Ireland, iii. 434
  Hyde, Thomas de la, i. 340.――Edward Earl of Clarendon, iii. 351.
    Advised the imprisonment of Sir Richard Grenville, and gives a very
    unamiable character of him, ii. 345
  Hydrangea hortensis, iv. 182
  Hydrock, St. ii. 383
  Hylesbery castle, iv. 228
  Hypericum monogynum, iv. 182
  Hythe, a cinque port, ii. 38
  Hywis family, ii. 400

  Iä, St. name explained, iv. 313
  Iceland, i. 336
  Ictam island, ii. 4
  Ictis supposed to be St. Michael’s Mount, ii. 20
  Ida or Ide, St. iii. 334
  Idalberga, St. iii. 33
  Ide, St. manor of, ii. 256
  Ideless, de, family, ii. 316
  Igerne, Duchess of Cornwall, i. 327, 329, 330 _ter._, 331, 332
    _sex._
  Ilcombe, account of, ii. 346
  Ilfracombe, i. 131
  Ilia, an Irish saint, ii. 257
  Iliad, iii. 420
  Illigan, Illogan, Illugan or Illiggan parish, i. 160――ii. 380, 388,
    389 _bis_――iii. 145――iv. 128.――Living of, ii. 243――iii. 239
  Illogan parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, ii. 234. Lordship of Tyhiddy, Basset
    family 235. Angove family 236. Carne Bray, Carne Kye 237. By Tonkin,
    Tehidy, Carnekie tinwork Nance 238. Tehidy 239. By Editor,
    etymology, St. Illuggen, Tehidy 240. Menwinnion copper mine, and
    populousness of the parish, iron tram-road, commenced by Lord
    Dunstanville on the jubilee 241. Basset family 242. Memoir of Lord
    de Dunstanville 243. Nautical affairs after the seven years’ war
    246. French Revolution 247. Peerage conferred on Sir F. Basset, his
    private character 249. Parish, statistics, and Geology by Dr. Boase 250
  Illuggen, St. ii. 240
  Impropriation of benefices, the first in England, iii. 114. Present
    number 115
  Inceworth manor, account of, iii. 105
  Index to Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, iv. 381
  Index Rhetoricus and Oratoricus, iv. 87
  India, iii. 187, 188 _bis_, 218.――Mr. Cole distinguished as an
    engineer in, iv. 9
  ――――, East, college, iii. 95
  ――――, East company, iii. 188
  ―――― fleet, iii. 187. Ship 187
  Indian Queens, i. 227 _bis_
  Ingangén, St. village, ii. 385
  Ingham, John de, i. 246
  Ingulphus, Abbot of Croyland, i. 240
  Inis Alga, iv. 67
  Inis Cathaig, iii. 434
  Iniscaw island, by Leland, iv. 266
  Inispriven, by Leland, iv. 287
  Inkpen family, iii. 346
  Inlet, ii. 430
  Inney river, iv. 70
  Innis, account of, i. 396; or Enys, ii. 93
  Innocent 3rd, Pope, i. 110, 312――iv. 36
  ―――― 4th, i. 176
  ―――― 5th, Pope, i. 110
  Inns of court, ii. 71
  Inquisition, i. 312, 315. Establishment of 311
  Inquisition of Oliver Sutton Bishop of Lincoln, and John de
    Pontifexia Bishop of Winchester, into the value of Cornish
    benefices, i. 16, 22, 32, 38, 42, 52, 60, 63, 107, 112, 115, 118,
    129, 135, 167, 174, 197, 202, 209, 213, 230, 236, 246, 253, 261,
    289, 294, 301, 304, 311, 316, 323, 344, 367, 377, 383, 386, 393,
    404, 407, 409, 413――ii. 36, 49, 59, 80, 86, 89, 92, 106, 118, 126,
    129, 141, 146, 151, 157, 169, 226, 230, 232, 234, 240, 251, 253,
    257, 273, 275, 282, 291, 299, 309, 315, 319, 332, 340, 354――iii. 60,
    64, 75, 78, 101, 110, 118, 124, 128, 139, 161, 168, 176, 182, 190,
    195, 198, 208, 222, 224, 237, 391, 402, 419, 421, 425, 428, 436,
    441, 448, 456, 462――iv. 1, 7, 12, 19, 43, 48, 50, 52, 61, 63, 66,
    70, 93, 99, 110, 116, 124, 128, 131, 137, 152, 155, 160, 161
  Inquisition, Wolsey’s, i. 22, 28, 32, 38, 42, 52, 61, 63, 107, 112,
    118, 129, 133, 135, 153, 160, 167, 174, 197, 202, 209, 213, 230,
    236, 243, 246, 253, 261, 289, 294, 301, 304, 308, 311, 316, 323,
    344, 367, 378, 383, 386, 393, 404, 407, 410, 413――ii. 36, 51, 59,
    80, 86, 89, 90, 92, 106, 116, 118, 126, 130, 136, 141, 146, 151,
    157, 169, 226, 230, 232, 234, 240, 251, 253, 258, 273, 275, 282,
    291, 299, 309, 315, 319, 332, 340, 354――iii. 60, 64, 75, 78, 101,
    118, 124, 128, 139, 161, 168, 177, 182, 190, 195, 199, 208, 222,
    232, 237, 354, 391, 402, 419, 421, 425, 436, 441, 448, 462――iv. 1,
    7, 12, 19, 48, 50, 53, 61, 66, 71, 93, 97, 110, 116, 128, 131, 137,
    152, 155, 160, 164, 185
  ―――― post mortem, iv. 56
  Inscriptions made by Leland at St. Mawe’s castle, iv. 273
  Inspeximus, iv. 83
  Intrenchment at Trove, i. 143
  Intsworth, i. 36.――Manor, account of, iii. 251
  Inundations of sand, iii. 6
  Ipswich, ii. 76
  Ireland, I. 115, 295, 336, 373――iii. 277 _bis_, 290, 336, 342, 408,
    431, 433 _bis_, 434――iv. 173.――Kings of, i. 328.――St. Patrick, the
    Apostle of, ii. 65. Perkin Warbeck proclaimed Lord of 188. Cleared
    of serpents by St. Patrick 298. Sir Richard Grenville undertakes to
    people 342. Lord Robarts Lord Lieutenant of 379.――Apostle of, iii.
    364. Missionary saints of 7
  Irish channel, i. 60――iii. 254
  ―――― church, iii. 434
  ―――― court, ii. 188
  ―――― kings, ten maintained miraculously by St. Perran, iii. 313
  ―――― men, i. 295
  ―――― oak, St. Michael’s church built of, ii. 176
  ―――― saints, iii. 331
  ―――― sea, i. 230, 245, 289, 322, 382――ii. 48, 86, 145, 234, 257,
    282――iii. 11, 139, 175, 176, 237, 429――iv. 42, 52, 66, 164
  ―――― wars, iv. 75, 116
  Iron Acton, Gloucestershire, iv. 86
  Isaac, i. 325.――His Memorials of Exeter, ii. 189, 196――iv. 111
  Isabel, Princess, i. 130
  Isabella, Queen of Edward 2nd, ii. 142
  Isey, St. iii. 190
  Isidore, Cardinal, ii. 370
  Iske or Ex river, i. 342
  Isle of Wight, ii. 76
  Isleworth, poor of, iii. 153
  Issey or Issy, St. parish, i. 115, 212――iii. 334, 335
  ISSEY, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Mr. Tonkin’s
    character of Cornish attornies, the Warne suit, ii. 253. Guardian
    saint, St. Giggy’s Well, Halewyn, Cannall-Lidgye 254. Trevance,
    Trevorike 255. Carthew mine 256. By Editor, name of the church,
    impropriators, monuments, St. Ide manor, Blayble ibid. Statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 257
  Italian people, claim the appearance of St. Michael, ii. 172
  ―――― romances, ii. 214
  Italy, i. 206――ii. 244, 369, 371 _bis_, 372, 375――iii. 121, 171,
    186, 187, 401――iv. 101――Thomas Paleolagus retires to, ii. 367, 368.
    Removes from 370
  Ithal, King of Gwent, i. 10
  Iva, Dinas, i. 412
  ―――― St. iii. 342
  Ive or Ivo, St. i. 151. History of 412
  Ive’s, St. bay, ii. 150――iii. 5, 339.――Its sand composed almost
    entirely of powdered shells, ii. 262
  ―――― St. borough, ii. 128――iv. 58.――Charters, extent of franchise,
    arms, form of writ, ii. 258. Sir F. Basset’s cup, and inscription
    upon 259, 271. John Payne mayor of 198.――Members of Parliament for,
    Mr. Borlase, iii. 51, 84. James Halse 91. William Noye 143, 152. Mr.
    Praed 9, 10
  ―――― St. lordship, iii. 46, 123
  ―――― St. parish, i. 344――ii. 215, 224, 229, 237, 286――iii. 5 _bis_,
    7, 173, 371, 435――iv. 52, 53 _bis_. By Leland 267.――Its living, i. 354
  IVE’S, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, ancient
    name, value of benefice, ii. 257. Patron, incumbent, rector, land
    tax, former name of the town, Pendennis Island, road for ships,
    Ludduham manor, borough of St. Ive’s, its franchise, arms, form of
    writ 258. Chief inhabitants, first charter, Trenwith 259. By Tonkin,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, former state of
    the town 260. Old chapel, roadstead, fishing, chief inhabitants,
    custom house officers, Trenwith 261. By Editor, present importance
    of the borough, methods of fishing for pilchards ibid. Manner of
    preserving, and nature of the fish 263. Pier, Praed’s Act, mode of
    preserving fishing nets, nets introduced from Dungarvon 264.
    Singular custom, Rev. Mr. Toup 265. Mr. Knill 266. His monument 267.
    Transport from the West Indies driven into St. Ive’s 268. Stephens
    family 269. Effect of reform bill, salubrity of the town, plague of
    1647, escape of the Stephens family, fever of 1786, cup given by Sir
    Francis Basset, inscription upon it, arms of the town 271. Church,
    view of the town, parish feast, St. Eury, statistics, rector,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 272
  ―――― St. town, i. 228, 403 _bis_, 412――iii. 6
  Ivonis, St. or St. John Baptist, i. 409

  Jack, Richard, family, ii. 279
  Jackman, Rev. William, ii. 31――Hugh, iii. 327
  ―――― of Treworock, i. 177
  Jackson, musical composer, iii. 220
  ―――― of Truro, Jane and John, i. 204
  Jacob, i. 241
  ―――― St. ii. 232
  Jacobstow parish, ii. 86――iii. 275, 352, _bis_, 353――iv. 59, 124,
    125, 131, 136
  JACOBSTOW parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Penfon, ii. 232. By
    Tonkin, patron saint, etymology ibid. By Editor, from Lysons,
    Southcott ibid. Penhallam, Berry Court, history of Mr. Degory Weare
    233. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 234
  Jago, John, family, i. 10.――John, ii. 136, 137. Rev. E. V. 376. Rev.
    William 136, 137. Family 5
  ―――― of Innis, Agnes and Jane, i. 399. John 397 _bis_, 398 _ter._,
    399 _bis_. Itai 397, 399 _bis_. Arms 397, 399. Etymology 397
  ―――― King, i. 397
  Jagoe, i. 416
  Jamaica, iii. 219 _bis_. Expedition to 86. Mr. Price settled there
    86. Sir Rose Price visited 87.――Sir William Trelawney, Governor of,
    iv. 37
  James, Henry, i. 277.――Thomas, ii. 160 _bis_――Pascoe, iii. 387. Dr.
    Thomas, his Bodleian Catalogue, and Introduction to Divinity 155
  ―――― of St. Columb, Anne and Mr. iii. 445
  ―――― of St. Keverne, W. iv. 33
  ―――― King, ii. 10. His reign and death 100
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 30, 56 _bis_, 65, 66, 93, 95, 155, 213, 269,
    277, 294, 382――iii. 75, 81, 83, 92, 104 _bis_, 132, 134, 142, 163
    _bis_, 183, 184, 212, 239, 281, 303, 314, 318, 337, 350, 449,
    463――iv. 2, 34, 67, 87, 88, 140, 161
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 22, 112, 227, 258――iii. 143, 201, 237, 238, 268, 297,
    298 _ter._――iv. 72, 85.――Distich upon, i. 105
  ―――― 4th, King of Scotland, ii. 186
  ―――― St. the Apostle, ii. 107, 338――iii. 161. His day 161, 309.
    Festival 439. Images of 309
  ―――― St. chapel of, iii. 309
  ―――― St. church at Compostella, ii. 107
  ―――― St. minor church, i. 299, 300
  ―――― St. hospital at Bridgewater, ii. 412
  ―――― St. hospital, Westminster, ii. 148, 149
  ―――― St. manor, Westminster, ii. 148. How obtained 145. Contradicted
    147. Exchanged for Conerton 140
  ―――― St. palace, Westminster, ii. 149
  ―――― St. priory, Bristol, i. 288――ii. 147, 148
  Jane, Nicholas, i. 215.――Thomas, ii. 16. Dr. William, Rev. Mr.
    Rector of Iron Acton, and Mr. schoolmaster, Truro 17.――Rev. Joseph
    of Truro, iv. 76. Mr. master of Truro school, was a native of
    Leskeard; Dr. William, Dean of Gloucester, his declaration 85
    Epigrams on, and Rev. J. son of the master 86
  J’Ans, Wrey, ii. 416
  Jansen, Cornelius, a picture by, iii. 156
  Janus, image of, iii. 144
  Jasminus revolutum, iv. 182
  Jeffery, Rev. George, of Linkinhorne, iii. 44
  Jeffries, Henry, i. 272. Family 274
  Jeffry, John, i. 10
  Jenkin, Peter, i. 216.――Henry and Perkin, iii. 387. Mr. 91. Family 83
  Jenkins, Grace, i. 363.――Rev. David, ii. 115. Mary 308. Mr. 124
  Jenkyn, James, i. 223
  ―――― of Trekyning, i. 223. Anne and James 262. Peter 223.――Family,
    iv. 139
  Jennings, i. 36
  Jerusalem, i. 307, 382, 411――ii. 414
  ―――― Knights of St. John of, ii. 180
  Jesuit confessor to Louis 14th, ii. 407
  ―――― missionaries, supposed to know Pope Gregory’s letter to St.
    Mellitus, ii. 290
  Jesuits, a college of, iv. 86
  Jesus chapel, St. Colomb Major, i. 214
  Jew, Cornish for, ii. 200
  ―――― family, iii. 270
  Jews, their cruelty and consequent persecution in England, i. 414
  Jews’ houses, ii. 215
  Jewyn, John, i. 83
  Job, Editor’s remarks upon the book of, iii. 69
  John or Ivan, i. 2
  ―――― William, i. 277.――George, ii. 124.――Rev. Ralph, iii. 326.
    Family 94
  ―――― of Gaunt, iii. 65
  ―――― of Rosemorron and Penzance, George, iv. 166
  John, King, ii. 118, 130, 158, 249, 310, 423, 426――iii. 169,
    433――iv. 71 _bis_, 144.――Founder of Beaulieu Abbey, with his
    reasons, ii. 327.――Made Truro a coinage town, iv. 73. Built the
    coinage hall there 72.――Prince, afterwards king, ii. 180. His
    treason, possessed of several castles, pursued, fled, deprived of
    bis estates, submitted, was pardoned 179
  John, King of France, ii. 39
  ―――― a monk of Glastonbury, iv. 27
  ―――― St. the Baptist, iii. 316.――St. Andrew and St. Peter his
    disciples, iv. 100. Pointed out Jesus to them 101
  ―――― St. the Evangelist, ii. 64――iv. 165.――His emblem, an eagle, ii.
    363.――His gospel, iii. 408
  ―――― St. cognizance of the order of, ii. 163.――Knights of, i.
    296――ii. 180――iii. 78, 80
  John’s, St. college, Oxford, ii. 407
  ―――― St. hospital, Bridgewater, ii. 412
  ―――― St. the Baptist’s hospital at Jerusalem, iii. 441
  ―――― St. the Baptist’s hospital in London, iii. 441
  ―――― St. the Baptist’s hospital at Sithney, ii. 157――iii. 441 _bis_.
    Account of 441. Little known of, Leland’s account of, site pointed
    out by a stone 446
  ―――― St. parish, i. 32――iii. 101, 374
  JOHN’S, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, saint, ii.
    250. Ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax.
    By Tonkin, manor of Intsworth 251. By Editor, Hals’s history of the
    Evangelists, real and legendary ibid. Tregenhawke manor by Lysons,
    patron, excavation in a cliff, church, statistics, rectors, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 252
  ―――― St. street, London, i. 411
  Johns, Henry, i. 273.――Stephen, ii. 55
  ―――― of Trewince, Stephen, ii. 57
  Johnson, Richard, i. 307.――Dr. iii. 49.――His correspondence with
    Macpherson, ii. 406.――Rev. W. M. of Perran Uthno, iii. 312. Mr. of
    St. Paul’s Churchyard 34
  Jolliffe, John, iv. 60
  Jone, i. 2
  Jones, Rev. Cadwallader, ii. 415. Edward, his Relics of the Welsh
    Bards 166.――Henry, iii. 429. Judge 144
  Jones of Wales, i. 416
  Jonson, Ben, ii. 22. His lines to Charles 1st, iii. 146
  Jope, Rev. J. i. 413――ii. 272
  Jordan of Dundagell, i. 331, 332
  Joseph, Michael, i. 86 _bis_.――iii. 388. Hanged, i. 87
  ―――― of Arimathea, St. iii. 262
  Jowle, i. 23
  Jubilee of 1809, ii. 241
  Julette, St. iv. 112
  Julian, St. iii. 55
  Juliana, i. 2
  Juliet, St. ii. 273. Account of 274
  Juliot, St. parish, ii. 86――iii. 232, 275
  Julius, St. Pope and Confessor, ii. 273, 274
  ―――― Cæsar, iii. 79――iv. 169
  Julyot, St. chapel, ii. 274 _bis_
  JULYOT, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, land tax, ii. 273. By Tonkin,
    patrons, saint 273. By Editor, saint from Whitaker ibid. Two St.
    Julyots, the present church formerly only a chapel, afterwards a
    parochial curacy, legend of the saint, her day, Rawle family,
    patrons of the benefice, statistics 274. Vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 275
  ―――― St. rectory, ii. 274
  Juncus, St. not in the Roman Calendar, iii. 292
  Junius, letters of, ii. 245
  Jupiter, i. 295.――Ammon, ii. 297
  ――――’s thunderbolt, ii. 132
  Just, St. Archbishop of Canterbury, ii. 279, 282. Account of 287
  ―――― St. Archbishop of Lyons, life of, ii. 279. His day 279, 280
  ―――― St. parish, i. 26――ii. 2, 50 _bis_, 265, 272――iii. 51, 242, 425
    _bis_, 428, 429――iv. 117.――Dr. Borlase, Vicar of, iii. 51
  JUST, ST. parish, near Penzance, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    saint, ancient state, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    impropriator, land tax, etymology, Pendeyn, Bray, ii. 282. Chapel
    Carne Bray, view from, greatness of the Bray family 283. St. Ewny’s
    chapel, table of the seven kings 284. By Tonkin, Mayne Scriffer. By
    Editor, Pendeen ibid. Excavation near, Cove, Botallock, mines at
    285. Busvargus, impropriation of tithes, patron, incumbent, Rev. J.
    Smyth the curate 286. Parish feast, history of St. Just 287.
    Celebration of birthdays 288. Letter from Pope Gregory to St.
    Mellitus 289. Statistics, vicar, patron, name, Geology by Dr. Boase
    290. Botallock mine, parish affords most specimens of British
    minerals, and abounds in interesting objects 291
  Just in Roseland, ii. 228.――Curacy, iii. 67
  JUST, ST. in Roseland parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    ancient state, value of benefice, endowment, patron, ii. 275.
    Incumbent, land tax, borough of St. Mawe’s, courts leet, lords of
    the manor, two members, market, fair, arms, form of writ, castle,
    ii. 276. Emoluments of its officers, history of its governors 277.
    Lines on Capt. Rouse, emoluments of the officers at Pendennis castle
    278. By Tonkin, patron of living ibid. Treveres, Rosecossa,
    Tolcarne, by Editor, saint, comments on his history, his day 279.
    St. Mawe, his life, the castle, tradition of Henry VIII. Franchise
    conferred by Elizabeth, invariably a close borough till the Reform
    Bill 1832, 280. Corrack road, Leland’s inscription on the castle
    walls, advowson, incumbent, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 281
  Just, St. Pool, ii. 281
  Just, St. or Justinian by Leland, iv. 285
  Justicia adatota, iv. 182
  Justinian, Emperor, ii. 37
  Justus, St. Bishop of Rochester, iii. 284
  Jutsworth, i. 203
  Juvenal, iv. 87.――Sentiment of, iii. 273

  Kaine or Kayne, St. parish, iii. 13, 245
  Kainsham, ii. 292
  Kalerso, manor of, in Hilary and Sithney, iii. 359
  Kambton, now Camelford, ii. 402
  Kanane or Lelant, i. 2
  Karentocus, St. church, iv. 112
  Karn Boscawen, i. 141
  Karnbree castle, iv. 228
  Karnedon, ii. 427
  Katherine, Princess, daughter of Edward 4th, i. 64
  ―――― St. i. 157
  Kaye, Rev. Sir Richard, Dean of Lincoln, ii. 286
  Kea parish, iii. 222; or St Kea. Ferry to 212.――ii. 315, 357
  ―――― St. ii. 24. His history 306
  Keate, i. 405. Capt. Ralph 216. Etymology 224
  ―――― of Bosworgy, i. 224. Sir Jonathan, Capt. Ralph, and arms ibid.
  Kebius, St. honoured in his own country, ii. 338
  Keckewich or Keckewitch of Catchfrench, George, ii. 68 _bis_. John
    68. Arms, ib.――iii. 169
  ―――― of Essex, ii. 68――iii. 169
  Keckwitch of Tregleale, and arms, i. 372
  ―――― of Trehawke, i. 372. _See Kekewich_
  Keen, iii. 82. John 395
  ―――― of Roach, i. 234
  Keeper, Lord, ii. 52
  Kegwin family, iii. 216
  ――――of Newlyn, i. 148
  Keigwin, John, i. 109
  ―――― or Keigwyn of Mousehole, James, iii. 444. Jenken, killed by the
    Spaniards, the fatal ball preserved 287. John 86. John, his works
    288. Parthenia 86. Family 90, 288, 328. Estates sold 288
  Keir, Mr. ii. 219
  Kekewich, i. 131.――Mr. iii. 172. Mr. M. P. 19, 20.――Samuel, iv. 97
  ―――― of Hall, Mr. Peter, and arms, ii. 410
  ―――― of Trehawke, Peter, iii. 169. Miss 237
  Kelland Lands, ii. 294
  ―――― of Peynsford, Devon, ii. 385
  Kellaton parish, i. 153――iii. 161
  Kellaway of Egge, John, ii. 110 _bis_
  KELLINGTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, manor and borough, court
    leet, members to parliament, ii. 309. Arms, market, and fairs, form
    of writ, Hengiston Downs, battle at, tin in, Bray family 310.
    Creation of a knight banneret. By Tonkin, saint, etymology 311. By
    Editor, saint, life of St. Nicholas 312. Proprietors of the manor,
    legal mistake of the Earl of Orford 313. Statistics, and Geology by
    Dr. Boase 314
  Kellio, i. 54 _bis_. Richard 54
  Kelliow, in Cornelly, iii. 361
  ―――― John, ii. 398.――Richard, iii. 41
  ―――― of Landlake, Christopher, and his arms, ii. 399
  Kelly, i. 383
  ―――― of Trewint, Thomas, iii. 170
  Kellyfreth, ii. 304
  Kellygreen manor, iv. 97
  Kellyland, account of, ii. 230, 231
  Kellyow, i. 319. Arms 320
  ―――― of Rosillian, i. 53
  Kellysberye castle, iv. 229
  Kelsey, i. 292, 293
  Kemell of Kemell, Elizabeth, Pearce, Pierce, and arms, i. 265
  Kempe, i. 8, 20――ii. 54, 58. Anna Coryton and Admiral Arthur 58.
    Rev. John, vicar of Fowey 48. Nicholas 54. Sir William 58. Mr. 97.
    Arms 54.――Arthur, and Rev. Charles T. of St. Michael Carhayes, iii.
    207. Family 75.――Robert, iv. 77
  ―――― of Carclew, Samuel, ii. 57
  ―――― of Chelsea, Nicholas, ii. 58
  ―――― of Lavethan in Blissland, Humphrey, ii. 56. Richard 58
  ―――― of Newington, Surrey, John, ii. 58
  ―――― of Olantigh in Wye, Kent, family, ii. 58
  ―――― of Penryn, James, i. 17――James and James, iii. 76. Jane 229.
    John 76. Samuel 225 _bis_, 228. Built a house at Cartlew 225, 228.
    Miss 74
  ―――― of Roseland, Miss, ii. 307
  ―――― of Rosteage, or Rosteague, Nicholas, ii. 58――iii. 76
  ―――― of Tregony, Richard, iv. 118
  Kempethorne, family monuments, iii. 255. Name 256
  ―――― of Tonacombe, family, iii. 255
  Kempton, ii. 81
  Ken, Thomas, Bishop of Bath and Wells, iii. 296, 299
  Kendall, i. 211.――Rev. Nicholas, ii. 393. Archdeacon Nicholas 391.
    Rev. Mr. 59. Monuments 391.――Charles, M.D. iii. 41. His daughter 42.
    Family monuments 253.――Rev. Mr. of Talland, iv. 38. Family 38
  ―――― of Killigarth, Archdeacon, iii. 41, 437
  ―――― of Medroff, Miss, ii. 89
  ―――― of Middlesex, Colonel James and his son, Thomas, and
    Archdeacon, iv. 23. Family 23
  ―――― of Pelyn, i. 205 _bis_. Rev. Nicholas 352.――Walter, ii.
    391.――Jane and Walter, iii. 186
  ―――― of Treworgye, i. 244, 318 _bis_, 319. John and Richard 318.
    Arms 319
  Kendred, i. 200
  Kenegie, account of by Editor, ii. 123, 124. Etymology 124
  Kenn, deanery of in Devon, iii. 372
  Kenna, St. ii. 207――iii. 120. A monk 206. She imparted virtue to St.
    Michael’s chair 206. To her well near Liskeard, her history,
    converted vipers into ammonites 207
  ――――’s, St. well, ii. 207
  Kennal manor, iv. 3
  Kenneggy, account of, by Hals, ii. 121, 122
  Kenrick cove, ii. 117, 331 _bis_
  Kensham family, ii. 320
  Kent county, i. 259――ii. 38――iii. 10, 284.――Coast of, iv.
    169.――People brave, i. 88. Rebels enter 87.――Lands drowned in, iii.
    310. Weald of 10
  ―――― Earl of, i. 87.――Hugo de Burgh, ii. 428.――Godwyn, iii. 310.
    Hubert de Burgh 349. Thomas Holland 27
  ―――― Ethelbert, King of, ii. 284
  ―――― Nicholas, i. 12. Thomas 260.――John, killed by a thunderbolt,
    ii. 132
  Kentigern, St. i. 306
  Kenwen, Kenwin, or Kenwyn parish, iv. 70, 75, 79, 80, 92 _bis_
  ―――― street, Truro, iv. 76 _bis_, 80. Has a church of its own 76
  Kenwin parish, iii. 313. Three barrows and four barrows in 322
  Kenwyn church, iii. 367――iv. 76, 77, 80
  ―――― parish, i. 177, 202――ii. 298, 299, 302
  KENWYN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, Edles, St. Clare’s well, ii. 315.
    Tregavethan 316. By Tonkin, Tregarvethan ibid. Three barrows,
    Roseworth 317. By Editor, includes old Truro, nature of soil,
    Calenick and Cavedras smelting houses ibid. Manor of Newham,
    Bosvigo, Comprigney, church conspicuous and commanding a fine view,
    bells, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 318
  Kenyon, i. 391
  Keppell, Admiral, court martial upon, ii. 246. Bishop of Exeter 224
  Kerantakers, St. i. 249
  Kerhender, i. 2
  Keri, i. 2
  Kerrier hundred, i. 32, 118, 135, 236, 301――ii. 358――iii. 59, 74
    _bis_, 75 _bis_, 110, 111, 124, 224, 228, 257, 416, 419, 421, 441,
    442 _quat._――iv. 1, 2, 5, 377. _See Kerryer_
  ―――― and Helston hundred, i. 38
  Kerrocus, St. iv. 112
  Kerryer hundred, ii. 1, 80 _bis_, 92, 116 _bis_, 126, 129 _bis_, 136
    _bis_, 155 _bis_, 319. Etymology of 320
  ―――― manor and stannaries, ii. 155
  Kerthen, i. 266 _bis_
  Kestell, i. 370――iii. 110, 113.――Account of, i. 375――iii. 111
  ―――― John, iii. 112. Miss 76. Mr. and two daughters 112. Family 111,
    113. Arms 112, 113.――Edward, iv. 77
  ―――― of Kestell, i. 370. James and John 371, 375. Arms 371, 374.
    Crest 375
  ―――― of Manacow, i. 371
  ―――― of Pendavy, i. 371 _bis_. Thomas 375
  ―――― of Wollas, i. 419
  ―――― of Wartha, i. 419
  ―――― river, i. 371
  Kestvaen found near Pelynt, iv. 32
  Keverines, St. by Leland, iv. 270
  Keverne, St. visits St. Perran, ii. 324
  ―――― church, its lofty situation, spire destroyed by lightning, ii. 325
  ―――― parish, ii. 250――iii. 332, 419
  KEVERNE, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, remarkable
    places, Treleage, ii. 319. Treland, Condura, and Tregarne manors,
    Lanarth, singular shipwreck 320. Treatment of the wrecked by the
    French 323. Arrival of a boat from Ireland 324. By Editor, St.
    Keverne, numerous coves, Coverack, Porthonstock, Porthalla, shoal
    of pilchards 324. Situation of church, spire destroyed by
    lightning during divine service, monuments, sarcophagus to the
    memory of Major Cavendish and his companions 325. Supposed cause
    of their wreck, tithes, Kilter 326. Lanarth, former impropriation,
    property of Beaulieu abbey at its dissolution, King John’s charter
    to it 327. With translation 328. Afforded sanctuary to Queen
    Margaret, and to Perkin Warbeck, incumbent of this parish 329.
    Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, geological interest of the
    Lizard, fragmentary rock near Bostowda 330. Cliffs bold, beautiful
    heath in the serpentine formation 331
  Keveryn, St. by Leland, iv. 288
  Kevorall, iii. 119
  Kevorne, St. i. 39――iii. 124
  ―――― parish, iii. 128 _bis_, 416, 421
  Kew, St. his history by Tonkin, ii. 337
  ―――― church, i. 74
  ―――― or Kewe, St. parish, i. 168, 173, 382――iii. 64, 74, 240――iv.
    42, 44, 93, 94, 95 _ter._
  KEW, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, land tax,
    chief places, Lanew, ii. 332. Lawsuit for 333. Bokelly, Trearike
    335. Dower bank, Tregeare, Penpons, Chappell Amble, Middle Amble
    336. By Tonkin, patron saint, impropriator 337. Incumbent, ancient
    name 338. By Editor, St. Kew or Kebius, parish fertile, situation of
    church, Skinden, Trewane ibid. Pedigree of Nicholls, impropriation
    of tithes, advowson, monuments in church, Editor the descendant of
    Attorney-General Noye, statistics, incumbent 339. Geology by Dr.
    Boase 340
  Key cross, ii. 300
  ―――― manor, account of, ii. 305
  ―――― or Keye parish, i. 76, 241――ii. 129
  KEY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ii. 298.
    Ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbents, land tax, chief
    places, Nansavallan 299. Guddarne, strange story of Mr. Bauden,
    Kelleho, Trelogas 300. Burrow belles, and three other burrows,
    opened, and stone tomb found within, Curlyghon 301. By Tonkin,
    etymology, church a daughter to Kenwyn, patron, incumbents, manor of
    Blanchland, mines upon, lawsuit about 302. Guddern, Nansavallan,
    Kelliou 303. Trevoster, Kellyfreth, Chasewater 304. Manor of Key
    305. By Editor, saint, his boat, Nansavallon ibid. Farm improved,
    Killiow, removal of church 306. Mr. Reginald Haweis, curious
    coincidence 307. Trelease, Carlian the birth-place of Sir Tristrem,
    Chasewater, its chapel, statistics 308. Vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    Baldue mine 309
  Keyewis, ii. 315
  Keyn, or Keyne, St. i. 316. British, daughter of Braghan King of
    Wales, account of by Hals, ii. 292. By Tonkin 293. Keyne, Saxon,
    account of by Hals 292. By Tonkin 293. Both may be the same 294
  KEYNE, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, incumbent, ii. 291. Land tax, saint, her history,
    another St. Keyne, Copleston family 292. By Tonkin, the two saints
    293. By Editor, ancient name from Lysons, proprietors of the manor,
    St. Keyne’s well, lines on, from Carew 294. Remarks by Tonkin,
    Bond’s account of 295. Southey’s lines upon 296. The petrified
    serpents are Cornua Ammonis 297. St. Hilda and St. Patrick’s
    miracles, the snakes had no heads, St. Brechan, statistics, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 298
  Keyne’s, St. well, account of by Carew, and verses on, ii. 294. By
    Tonkin and Bond 295. Southey’s verses on 296
  Keynesham, ii. 293. Cornua Ammonis abundant in 297
  Keynock castle, iv. 228
  Khalcondylas’s account of Thomas Paleolagus, ii. 368
  Kiaran, or Kenerin, St., (Perran) iii. 331
  Kidlacton, ii. 427 _bis_
  Kieran, Bishop, ii. 319
  ―――― St. rectory, ii. 319
  Kigan, iv. 76
  Kilcoid lands, ii. 394
  Kildare, Earls of, i. 34. Charles, Earl of 297
  Kilgal family, iv. 36
  Kilgather, ii. 394
  ―――― parish, ii. 398
  Kilkhampton manor, possessed by the Grenvilles nearly from the
    Conquest, ii. 343
  ―――― parish, ii. 413――iii. 118, 254, 256, 349, 351――iv. 15, 19
  KILKHAMPTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Stowe, ii. 340. Grenville
    family, erection of Bideford bridge, loss of the Mary Rose frigate
    341. The Grenvills 342. Battle of Lansdowne, Orcott. By Editor,
    account of the Grenville family 343. Gallant encounter of Sir
    Richard Grenville with the Spaniards of Terceira 344. Mansion at
    Stowe, Ilcombe 346. Alderscombe, Elmsworthy, monuments in the
    church, description of one to Sir Beville Grenville 347. Patron of
    the living, character of Sir Beville 348. His letter to Sir John
    Trelawney 349. Family continued 350. Dispersion of the materials of
    Stowe, Alderscombe 351. Hervey’s Meditations composed here,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 352. Extracts from
    the register 348
  Killaloe, diocese of, iii. 434
  Killas hills, iii. 11
  Killaton parish, ii. 229
  Killcoid, i. 264
  Killiganoon, etymology and history of, ii. 34
  Killigarth, i. 262 _bis_, 264.――Miss, ii. 398
  Killignock, or Checkenock, iv. 139
  ―――― Thomas and his daughter, family, iv. 139
  Killigrew barton, i. 399 _quat._, 403, 411. Account of 398
  ―――― i. 136. John 93. Sir John 136. Sir Peter 137 _bis_. Sir William
    65. Monuments 136――ii. 5, 372, 376. Family descended from Richard
    King of the Romans 8. Lords of Pendennis castle 17. Slighted by Hals
    21. Represented by Lord Wodehouse 23. Founded the hospital of St.
    John at Helston 163. Ann 22. George 5 _bis_. Killed 5. Henry 5, 22.
    Sir Henry 7 _bis_, 15, 372, 373 _bis_, 376. Obtained from the Bishop
    of Exeter, the manor of Kirton, now gone from the name 7. His
    marriage 15. Appointed ambassador to Henry 4th of France, his wife’s
    Latin letter to her sister Lady Cecil 16. His daughter married to
    Sir Jonathan Trelawney 16. Ambassador to Venice or Genoa 372. Jane,
    widow of Sir John, murders two Spanish merchants, tried and
    convicted, pardoned, but her accomplices sentenced to death 6. Gave
    a silver cup to the mayor of Penryn 7, 97. Her story cannot be true
    21. John 5. Built the town of Falmouth 8. Opposed by the
    neighbouring boroughs 9. Proceeded with the King’s approbation 10.
    Sir John 5, 7. Jane his widow 6. Fired his own house 17. Maugan 5.
    Peter 5. Sir Peter 5 _ter._, 6, 147. Built a church at Falmouth 3.
    Annexed the advowson to his manor of Arwinick, buried in the
    chancel, gave a house and garden to the rector, and a pulpit cloth
    to the church 4. Procured a charter of incorporation for the borough
    8. Thomas, jester to Charles 2nd 14. His reply to Lewis 14th,
    Reproof of Charles’ extravagance turned against William 3rd, and his
    court 15. Degraded by common report, his history from the
    Biographical Dictionary 21. Son of Sir Robert 21. An author, buried
    in Westminster Abbey, the reverse of Cowley, epigram upon both 22.
    William 23. Sir William, Bart., wasted his estate 5. Lady 373. Mr.
    20. Arms 7.――Sir Henry and his daughter, iii. 169. M. L. and Sir
    Peter 228. Sir William 75. Mr. founder of St. John’s Hospital,
    Sithney, family 75 _bis_
  Killigrew, of Arwinick, Jane Lady, ii. 97.――George, iii. 417. Sir
    Peter 417 _bis_. Miss 147
  ―――― of Killigrew, i. 398. Sir John 398, 399
  Killington church, ii. 230
  ―――― parish, iv. 6, 7
  Killingworth, iv. 24
  Killiton borough, court leet, members of parliament, and mode of
    election, ii. 309. Election of mayor, arms, market and fairs, form
    of writ. Sir Edward Bray lived at 310
  Killrington, Alice and Walter, i. 262
  Killter of Kevorne killed a royal commissioner, ii. 192
  Killygarth, ii. 181.――Barton, iv. 21, 22 _bis_, 23, 38
  ―――― manor, iv. 21, 22 _bis_, 23, 36, 38
  Killygrew, Sir Peter, Bart., iv. 72. Mr. 22
  Killyow, account of, by Hals, ii. 300. By Tonkin 303. By Editor 305
  ―――― of Killyow, ii. 303
  ―――― of Lanleke, ii. 303
  ―――― of Rosiline, ii. 303
  Killyquite. _See Colquite_
  Kilmarth, iv. 109
  Kilmenawth or Kilmenorth, iv. 36
  Kilminarth, celt found at, iv. 33
  ―――― woods, iv. 29
  Kilter, account of, ii. 326
  ―――― Mr. concerned in Arundell’s rebellion, ii. 326
  Kilwarby, Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, i. 83
  Kilwarth hill, description of, i. 189. Ascent to the highest points
    190, 191. Etymology 193
  Kilworthy near Tavistock, ii. 230
  Kinance cove, iii. 259, 260. Its beauty 259
  King, the, iii. 223
  ―――― or Kings of England, i. 139.――ii. 59, 272. Annals of 60
  ―――― Charles 2nd, at Boconnoc, i. 113, 114 _ter._ His speech to Sir
    F. Basset 114
  ―――― George packet, iii. 229
  King, i. 270, 413. Elizabeth 222. Oliver and arms 204.――Degory, ii.
    253, 254. Edward, his Munimenta Antiqua, and hypotheses of the
    extreme antiquity of Lanceston Castle 423 _bis_, 424. Philip 423.
    Mr. 377. Family 217.――Lord Chanceller, iii. 51
  ―――― of Lambesso, i. 204. Henry ibid.
  King’s army, iv. 186
  ―――― books, i. 320――ii. 123, 146, 356, 391, 394 _bis_, 398, 413,
    417――iii. 14, 22, 24, 37, 40, 44, 46, 56, 116, 126, 182, 188, 224,
    255, 257, 260, 267, 276, 284, 291, 306, 313, 334, 339, 345, 347,
    349, 352, 372, 374, 380, 396, 405, 419, 423, 426, 431, 437, 443, 450
    _bis_, 457 _bis_――iv. 7, 15, 23, 40, 44, 62, 66, 75, 95, 102, 112,
    117, 118, 129, 140, 153, 157, 162
  King’s College, Cambridge, i. 146――ii. 153, 209, 244
  ―――― road, ii. 1. In Falmouth harbour 275, 281
  Kingdon, Rev. T. H. i. 135.――Robert, ii. 416.――G. B. iii. 351. Rev.
    John of Marham church 117 _bis_.――G. B. character of, iv. 16. Rev.
    John of Whitstone 154
  Kingfisher ship, iii. 187
  Kingills, King of the West Saxons, ii. 284
  Kingston, iii. 108
  ―――― Sir Anthony, i. 88.――Provost marshal, ii. 197. Taxed with
    extreme cruelty 198
  Kirkham, i. 260. Mrs. Damaris 376
  Kirton, Bishop of, i. 116――iii. 1.――Levignus, ii. 60. Lurginus 62
  ―――― bishopric, i. 231――ii. 61 _bis_, 299
  ―――― see of, iii. 456
  ―――― manor alienated from the see of Exeter, ii. 7
  Kist Vaen, iii. 319
  Kit or Kitt hill, i. 122, 159――ii. 314
  Kitson, Rev. Walter, i. 409
  Kivell, Ann, iii. 77.――Thomas, ii. 241
  Knava, Ralph, i. 121. Etymology 122
  ―――― of Godolphin, John, i. 122
  Kneighton’s Kieve, i. 343
  Knicker, i. 317
  Knight, John, iii. 319, 327
  ―――― of Gasfield Hall, Essex, iii. 192
  Knights banneret, mode of creation of, ii. 311
  ―――― hospitallers, iv. 48, 50.――Account of, i. 410
  ―――― of the Round Table, i. 339 _bis_. Instituted 336
  ―――― Templars, iii. 83. Of Jerusalem, iv. 48 _bis_, 49
  Knighton, St. iv. 155
  Knill, John, eccentric, ii. 128. His life and mission to the West
    Indies 266. Privateering, humane, built a pyramid for his own
    burial, but was buried at St. Andrew’s, Holborn 267. His
    character 268
  Kniverton of Treadreath in Lelant, iv. 4
  Kniveton, Thomas, iii. 6
  Knollys, Sir Robert, a valiant commander under the Black Prince, ii. 176
  Kradock ap Ynir, King, iv. 44
  Kurie, St. Eleeeson, i. 315
  Kusterus’ Suidas, ii. 266
  Kynans cove, beauty of its rocks and caverns, and its rare plants,
    ii. 360
  Kynock castle, i. 77, 88, 94
  Kyvere Ankou, i. 9

  Laa, i. 44. Anecdote of Mr. and Mrs. ib.
  Lacy, Walter de, iii. 405
  Ladoca, St. history of, ii. 353
  Ladock manor, ii. 354
  ―――― parish, i. 386――iii. 354, 450.――Rector of, Mr. Pooley, ii. 34
  LADOCK parish, or Lassick, Hals’s manuscript lost. By Tonkin,
    situation, ii. 352. Boundaries, name, value of benefice, patrons,
    incumbent, manor of Nanreath, Hay, Boswaydel, Bedoke or Bessake 353.
    By Editor, value of benefice, village of Bedock, Pitt property,
    Trethurfe, Nansaugh, Hay, manor of Bessake, Rev. John Eliot 354.
    Beautiful vale, church, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 355. Stream
    tin and gold 356
  ―――― valley, iii. 189
  Lady chapel, ii. 201
  Lahe, i. 144
  ―――― Rev. John, Rector of Lanivet, character and memoir of, ii. 388.
    William lost at sea, his brother died of consumption 389.――John
    Bishop of Chichester, iii. 295. One of the seven 299
  Lalant or Kananc, i. 2
  Lamana chapel, iii. 245
  La Mayne, free chapel of, iv. 26
  Lamb, two brothers made a great fortune, ii. 47
  Lambert, William, Prior of St. Michael’s Mount, the last Prior, ii.
    209.――Elizabeth, iii. 86
  Lambessa, in St. Clement’s, family seat of the Footes, iv. 90
  Lambesso, i. 207. Account of 203
  Lambeth palace, iii. 71, 73. Archbishop’s chapel at 296
  Lambourn manor, i. 10――iii. 318 _bis_, 325. Account of 316, 319
  Lambourne town, iii. 318 _bis_, 319, 321, 324
  Lambrigan, iii. 314, 319, 324. Or Lambourne Wigan, account of 314
    Lower town of 315
  Lambron of Lambourn, Amara, iii. 317. John 316 _bis_. Sir John and
    Sir John 316. Sir John 320. William 316. Family 316, 317 _bis_. Arms 316
  Lamburn, Sir William, i. 213.――Family, ii. 80
  Lamburne, heir of, iii. 140
  ―――― of Lamburne, i. 120
  ―――― parish in Peran, iii. 317
  Lamelin of Lamelin family, Margery, Thomas, arms, ii. 411
  Lamellin manor, ii. 411――iii. 20.――Account of, ii. 411
  Lamellyn, ii. 89――iii. 169
  Lametton, ancient name of St. Keyne parish, ii. 294
  ―――― manor, ii. 294
  Lammana, a cell for Benedictine Monks at, its chapel remains,
    described, iv. 25
  ―――― island, iv. 26
  Lamoran manor, ii. 356. Account of 357
  ―――― or Lammoran parish, iii. 180, 207, 222. Or Lamorran, i. 242
  LAMORAN parish, Hals’s Manuscript by Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, saint, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, manor of
    Lamoran, ii. 356. By Editor, value ibid. Two villages, Tregenna,
    Lamoran manor, advowson, situation of church, monuments, statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, rector, patron 357
  ―――― village, ii. 357
  Lamorrick village, ii. 385
  Lampeer, i. 204
  ―――― of Truro, his unfortunate end, ii. 30
  Lampen, i. 205.――Rev. Robert, iii. 370
  Lamplugh, Archbishop of York, iii. 296, 297
  Lalant, by Leland, iv. 285
  Lanante, by Leland, iv. 267
  Lanarth, account of, by Hals, ii. 320. By Editor 327
  Lanbaddern, heir of, iii. 140
  Lancar, i. 83
  Lancashire, ii. 112
  Lancaster castle, ii. 179, 257
  ―――― John, Duke of, ii. 259
  ―――― Earl of, Thomas, ii. 363.――Edmund, iii. 19
  ―――― house of, ii. 108, 185, 186
  Lance, i. 394, 395. Richard 205
  ―――― of Penare, i. 204
  Lancells barton, ii. 415
  ―――― house, ii. 416
  ―――― manor, ii. 414
  ―――― parish, or Launcells, iii. 111, 118
  LANCELLS parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, patron, value, ii. 413. Incumbent, earlier value,
    appropriation, Lancells manor 414. By Editor, cell of Austin canons,
    Hartland abbey, descent of property in the parish by Lysons 415.
    Manor of Norton Rolle, of Yellow Leigh, of Thorlibeer, of
    Mitchell-Morton, Tre Yeo, situation of the church, Chamond monument,
    Lancell’s house, destroyed, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 416
  ―――― Prior of, ii. 49
  Lanceston, or Launceston, ii. 87, 98, 377, 378, 430 _bis_. The
    Royalists march into Somersetshire from 343.――Charles 1st. advanced
    to, iv. 185
  ―――― assizes, ii. 333. Trials at 52, 331, 336
  ―――― castle, description of, ii. 421, 423――iv. 229.――Its extreme
    antiquity, ii. 423
  ―――― Court of Common Pleas at, ii. 53
  ―――― domui, i. 112
  ―――― mayor of, his feudal service, ii. 229
  ―――― parish church, ii. 420
  ―――― priory, ii. 377. Account of 425. Its church and monuments, its
    destruction 425. Loss of archives and charters 426. Revenues 428,
    429. Horton and Stephan, priors of 419
  Lancherit, iii. 139
  Lancorla, iv. 138 _bis_
  Landaff, Bishops of, St. Theliaus, i. 321. St. Dubritius and their
    Constat 382
  ―――― cathedral, built by St. German, ii. 65
  ―――― church of, ii. 172
  Landawidnick, ii. 116
  Landegey or Landegge parish, the same as Key, ii. 299, 305, 315
  Landedy and Lanner in St. Key, iii. 359
  Lander, the two African travellers, are from Truro, their discovery
    of the course of the Niger, monument erecting to, iv. 90
  Landeveneck monastery, ii. 129 _bis_
  Landew, ii. 418――iii. 41. Account of 40. Monuments of the possessors 43
  ―――― family, iii. 42
  Landewednack parish, iv. 53
  LANDEWEDNACK parish, Hals’s MS. lost, ii. 357. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, saint, value, patron, manor of Lizard. By Editor,
    Church town and Lizard town, villages, manor of Tretheves, Mr.
    Fonnereau, lighthouses 358. Statistics, rector, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase. Cliffs interesting 359. Perranbonse and Hensall coves,
    geology by Editor, soap rock, native copper, Kynan’s cove, beautiful
    assemblage of rocks, natural caverns, rare plants 360. Instances of
    longevity by Dr. Borlase, spar manufactory 361
  Landigey or Landithy, iii. 83, 90. Account of 80
  Landisfarne, i. 289, 290
  ―――― Bishop of, i. 290
  ―――― bishoprick, transferred to Durham, i. 290
  Landowednack Lizard, i. 348
  ―――― parish, iii. 128, 259, 424
  Landrak, ii. 59
  Landrake parish, i. 103――ii. 277.――Or Lanrake, iii. 345, 347, 461
  LANDRAKE parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, patron, manor of Lanrake, ii. 361. By Editor,
    manor, churchtown, church, monuments in, Wotton cross, Tidiford,
    small river, tradition of Tidiford, Plymouth limestone burnt, its
    value in agriculture, Wotton 362. St. Erney 363. By Editor,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 364
  Land’s End, i. 132, 138, 228, 359――ii. 149, 182, 225 bis 237, 247,
    283, 284, 408――iii. 6, 11, 99, 120, 265, 309, 310, 428, 430,
    445――iv. 165, 166, 168, 173, 174. Road to, i. 20.――Anciently
    called Bolerium, ii. 20. Road from London to 317.――Description of,
    iii. 429. District 427. Various names of 431. Granite rocks at,
    scene, latitude and longitude, sun at 432. Its inscriptions 433.
    _See Dartmoor_
  Land tax, iii. 75, 110, 119, 128, 139, 161, 168, 177, 182, 190, 195,
    199, 208, 222, 237, 271, 391, 403, 419, 421, 425, 428, 436, 441,
    448, 456, 462――iv. 1, 7, 13, 19, 20, 39, 43, 53, 59, 63, 66, 68, 71,
    93, 99, 111, 128, 131, 137, 152, 155, 160, 164, 185.――Act for
    redeeming, i. 403. Fixed for Cornwall 1
  Landulph parish, i. 103, 310――iii. 345.――Rev. F. V. J. Arundell,
    rector of, ii. 387
  LANDULPH parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    ii. 364. Etymology, value, patron 365. By Editor, situation of
    church, monuments, one to Theodore Paleolagus, history of him by Mr.
    Arundell ibid. His dynasty 366. Causes of his removal from Italy
    370. His marriage, issue, and residence at Clifton in this parish
    372. Death 373. Chasm in the register, discrepancy in the dates of
    Theodore’s death, account of his children 374. Manors of Landulph
    and Glebridge, Clifton 375. Lower family, life of Dr. Bradley,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 376
  Landuwednac, name explained, iv. 314
  Landy, St. ii. 358
  Lane, Rev. Mr. and his wife, died of a violent fever raging at St.
    Ives, ii. 271
  ―――― village, i. 20
  Laneast parish, i. 197――iii. 461――iv. 63 _bis_, 69, 70
  LANEAST parish, MS. of Hals lost, ii. 376. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, impropriation 377. By Editor, villages, Tregeare,
    impropriation, statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase, Letcot mine of
    manganese 378
  ―――― village, ii. 377
  Laner castle, iv. 228
  Lanescot and Fowey Consols, iv. 110
  Laneseley church, ii. 118
  ―――― manor, ii. 118, 119 _ter._, 176. Account of 120, 121
  Lanest, ii. 430 _bis_
  Lanew barton, account of, ii. 332. Lawsuit for 333. Sold 334
  Lanewa, account of, i. 418
  Lanfrank, Archbishop of Canterbury, i. 110
  Langden, Walter, iii. 358
  Langdon of Keverill, Walter, iii. 123
  Langford, Humphrey, and daughters, iii. 116. Family 116
  ―――― of Swadle Downes, Devon, Walter, iii. 116
  ―――― of Tremabe, Samuel, i. 177
  ―――― hill, iii. 116
  Langhairne, De, family, ii. 316 _bis_. Arms 316. Lost their property
    in the civil wars 317
  Langherne of Trevillon, i. 400. Thomas ibid.
  Langland, John, Bishop of Lincoln, i. 233
  Langley, Mr. of York, ii. 286
  Languit, etymology of, ii. 332
  Lanhadern, account of, i. 415
  ―――― of Lanhadern, i. 415 _quat._ Serlo de, and Serlo Lord 415
  Lanhearne, Alice, John de, iii. 149
  Lanhedrar, account of, i. 419
  ―――― of Lanhedrar, Serlo de, Baron, i. 419
  ―――― Lower, account of, i. 419
  Lanhengye chapel, i. 218
  Lanher, etymology of, and bishop’s palace at, i. 15
  Lanherne, i. 213.――Manor, ii. 145.――Account of, iii. 139,
    149.――Butler or Pincerna, Lord of, ii. 145
  ―――― Roman catholic establishment at, a refuge for nuns, iii. 150.
    Descended lineally from before the Conquest 151. Church near it
    ibid.
  Lanhidroc, i. 113
  Lanhidrock church, iii. 177.――Or Lanhydrock, i. 74
  ―――― house, account of, Editor remembers it, ii. 382. Housekeeping
    at 383
  ―――― manor, ii. 383
  ―――― parish, ii. 384, 390. Or Lanhydrock 187――iv. 74, 161, 187.
    Essex quartered at 185
  LANHIDROCK parish, MS. of Hals lost, by Tonkin, situation, ii. 378.
    Boundaries, saint, manor, residence  built by Lord Robarts, Earl
    of Radnor 379. His pedigree, Trefry 380. By Editor, Robarts family
    381. Lanhidrock house, impropriation of benefice 382. Hospitality
    of Lord Radnor, possessors of the manor, statistics 383. Geology
    by Dr. Boase 384
  Lanhudnow, i. 349
  Lanick, i. 199
  Lanisley or Lanistley, ii. 121. Etymology 123
  Lanivet church tower has no pinnacles, ii. 386
  ―――― hill, ii. 390
  ―――― parish, ii. 379, 390――iii. 55, 395
  LANIVET parish, Hals’s manuscript lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, patrons, incumbent, Tremere estate,
    ii. 384. By Editor, several villages 385. Church, monuments, patron
    and rector, St. Bennet’s convent 386. Landed property of the parish,
    select vestries, Rev. John Lake, rector 388. His family, statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 389. Lanivet hill 390
  ―――― village, ii. 385
  Lank Major, i. 131
  ―――― Minor, i. 131
  Lankinhorn, ii. 428
  Lankinhorne, vicar of, iii. 457
  Lankynhorne, ii. 430
  Lanlaran (now St. Lawrance), i. 77
  Lanleke, in South Pederwyn, ii. 398, 418
  Lanlivery parish, ii. 41, 88, 379, 384――iii. 24, 26, 29, 55, 56――iv.
    99, 110
  LANLIVERY parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    ii. 390. St. Vorch, value of benefice, patron, incumbent. By Editor,
    conspicuous monuments in church, Pelyn house, summer house, St. Chad
    391. Portrait and inscription, Restormel castle, Richard King of the
    Romans kept his court there, titles, palace at Lestwithiel 392.
    Restormel house, statistics, vicar, and Geology by Dr. Boase 393
  Lanmigall, ii. 169, 175
  Lanmigell, i. 118, 261――ii. 80
  Lannan, i. 292
  Lannant parish, iii. 5
  ―――― or Lelant town, by Leland, iv. 267
  Lannar, Miss, iii. 125
  Lannyvet parish, iv. 160
  Lanowe, the ancient name of St. Kew parish, ii. 338. Etymology 332
  Lanrake manor, account of, ii. 361, 362
  Lanreath manor, account of, ii. 395. Sold 396
  ―――― parish, iii. 291, 302, 347――iv. 29, 110, 111, 115, 155.――Or
    Lanethon, ii. 398
  LANREATH parish, otherwise Lanraithow, Lanrayton, Lanrethan, or
    Lanrethon, Hals’s MS. lost, ii. 393. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, rectory, value, patron, incumbent, court, Sergeaux
    family 394. By Editor, Lanreath manor, court 395. Church, Grylls
    family 396. Botelett manor, Treyer manor, Trewen, Treean,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 397
  Lanredock, ii. 379
  Lanreth, i. 316
  ―――― manor, iv. 22, 110
  ―――― parish, ii. 291
  Lansagey, ii. 299
  Lansallas manor, ii. 399, 400
  ―――― parish, ii. 409, 412――iii. 291――iv. 19, 36 _bis_, 38
  LANSALLAS parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    value in King’s books, patron, incumbent, residents, ii. 398. Manor
    399. By Editor, church, latitude and longitude, manor ibid. Raphel
    manor, Tregavithick, Polvethan, Polperro, its trade and situation,
    statistics, rector 400. Geology by Dr. Boase, copper mine, blue
    slate, Polperro harbour 401
  Lansalwys, ii. 394
  Lansan manor, iii. 456
  Lansdowne, i. 113
  ―――― battle of, ii. 343, 345, 347, 350――iii. 40, 199――iv. 162, 172
  ―――― collection, ii. 426
  ―――― Lord, ii. 98. George Granville Lord, erected a monument to his
    grandfather, Sir Beville Grenville 348
  Lansen, iv. 50
  Lan Stephen, the ancient name of Lanceston, ii. 417
  Lanstoun, by Leland, iv. 256
  Lansulhas, iv. 22
  Lantallan, i. 77
  Lanteagles by Fowey, ii. 36
  Lantegles or Lanteglos, by Camelford parish, i. 1, 3, 304, 322――ii.
    48, 274――iii. 81, 222 _bis_, 291――iv. 20, 42, 44.――Rev. Wm.
    Phillipps, rector, ii. 399
  Lanteglise juxta Fawey, by Leland, iv. 279
  LANTEGLOS JUXTA CAMELFORD parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, value of rectory, patron, incumbent, in manor
    of Helstone in Trigg, ii. 401, and deanery of Trigg minor, the
    manor, a castle and two parks at Helstone, Camelford town,
    etymology, Arthur slain there, relics dug up, tradition of the
    battle 402. A later battle, Roman coins found, Carew’s etymology,
    insignificance of the borough, had a charter from Richard Earl of
    Cornwall, market and fairs 403. Constitution, revenues and seal of
    the borough, only one street, formerly a chapel 404. By Editor,
    extent of manor ibid. Vestiges of a camp, villages in the parish,
    Fentonwoon, Wallis the circumnavigator, Lord Darlington proprietor
    of the borough, it was close till extinguished in 1832, Lord
    Camelford, Mr. Macpherson 405. His correspondence with Dr. Johnson,
    Mr. Phillipps rector, his monument, Dr. Lombard his predecessor 406.
    Memoir and anecdotes of him 407. Statistics, present rector, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 408
  Lanteglos juxta Fowey parish, ii. 41, 398――iv. 38, 110, 111, 115, 188
  LANTEGLOS JUXTA FOWEY parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, value of living, patron, incumbent, manor of Hall,
    Fitz-William family, ii. 409. Description of the seat, Bodenick 410.
    Lamellin manor. By Editor, situation of church, monuments, value,
    tradition of Charles 1st being fired at, Polruan 411. Once a
    corporate town, appropriation of benefice 412. Statistics, and
    Geology by Dr. Boase 413
  Lantenny, i. 40
  Lantiant, by Leland, iv. 277
  Lantine, i. 415――ii. 89
  Lantreghey, iv. 25
  Lan Uthno, in St. Erth, iii. 311
  Lanvorch, ii. 391
  Lanwhitton or Lawhitton manor, iii. 2, 42
  ―――― parish, ii. 95――iii. 40, 43, 335, 338, 456
  LANWHITTON, parish of, Hals deficient. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, origin of the name, value of benefice, patron, manor,
    iii. 1. Farming of, remarkable places, Hexworthy 2. Bullsworthy 3.
    By Editor, church, monuments 3. Lease of the manor, Rev. Mr. Walker,
    statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 4
  Lanwordaby, Thomas, ii. 189
  Lanyhorn castle, iv. 228
  Lanyhorne by Leland, iv. 273
  ―――― creek, iii. 404
  ―――― or Lanihorne manor, iii. 406
  Lanyon, account of, ii. 142
  ―――― cromlech, stone replaced, iii. 32
  ―――― i. 125, 405.――John, ii. 32 _bis_. Built Trelisick house 32.
    Miss 259.――John, iii. 242. John 242, 243 _bis_. John 242 _bis_.
    Richard and William 242. The golden Lanyon 243. Family 242,
    427.――Miss, iv. 101
  ―――― of Lanyon, ii. 142, 143 _ter._ Tobias and arms 142
  ―――― of Madern, ii. 143
  ―――― of Normandy, and arms, ii. 143
  ―――― manor, possessors of, ii. 89
  Laran bridge, ii. 41.――Etymology, iv. 157
  Larmer family, iii. 47
  Larnake, iii. 371
  Larnick, Little, iv. 29. Curiosities found near 33
  Laroche, James, i. 101.――Sir James of Bristol, iii. 193
  Lateran, church of St. John, at Rome, iv. 165
  ―――― council, i. 110 _ter._, 318――ii. 125.――Councils, iv. 165
  Latin church, i. 115.――Its difference from the Greek, ii. 370
  ―――― service for churches, books of, called in, iii. 170 Latitude of
    Falmouth, ii. 23. Of the windmill near Fowey 48. Of Lansallas church 399
  ―――― and longitude of Eddystone lighthouse, iii. 376. Of the Land’s
    End 432. Of St. Minver spire and Pentire point 281. Of the Ram head
    375. Of Trevose head 281
  Latur, de, John and Richard, iv. 28
  Laud, Archbishop, iii. 71. His library and palace given to Mr.
    Peters 73
  Launcell’s manor, iii. 353.――House, iv. 18
  ―――― parish, i. 133――iv. 12, 15, 18, 23. Healthiness of, specimens
    of longevity in 18
  ―――― prior of, iv. 13
  Launceston borough, iii. 14――iv. 51.――Burgesses and charter, iii.
    15. Duke of Northumberland’s influence in 460. John Buller, M.P. for
    249. Edward Herle, M.P. for 41. Two Mr. Landews, M.P.s for 42
  ―――― Brygge, iv. 255
  ―――― castle, i 188――iii. 458
  ―――― church, iii. 45
  ―――― gaol, i. 345
  ―――― honor of, iii. 406
  ―――― manor, iv. 50
  ―――― parish, iii. 1, 2, 180, 335, 338, 457, 458 _bis_, 459, 461――iv.
    50, 51, 52.――Name, iii. 458
  LAUNCESTON or LANCESTON, St. Mary Magdalen parish, Hals’s MS. lost.
    By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name, saint, Dunhevet, ii. 417.
    Its ruins, wells, rivulet, present town scantily supplied with
    water, inhabitants transferred to Launceston, privileges 418.
    Leland’s description, market place, St. Stephen’s church, castle,
    priory, tombs, St. Catherine’s chapel, Carew’s account, two boroughs
    419. Parishes of St. Thomas and St. Stephen, foundation of the town,
    increase of wealth, corporation, fairs, markets, assizes, a
    sanctuary, Castle Terrible, gaol, leather coins, friary and abbey
    420. Tonkin’s description of the castle, held by the Piper family,
    story of Sir Hugh Piper 421. Willis’s history of the borough,
    privileges granted by Richard Earl of Cornwall, assizes appointed by
    Richard 2nd, the property in the Duke of Cornwall 422. Corporation
    of 1620, market changed. By the Editor, magnificent remains of the
    castle, King’s hypothesis of its antiquity 423. Compared with
    Trematon and Tunbridge, the building 424. Etymology, also of
    Launceston, extent and wealth of the priory, wanton devastations of
    the 16th century 425. Destruction of documents, charters of Bishop
    Warlewast and Henry 3rd 426. Revenues of the priory 428. The same
    from the Augmentation office 429. Long the capital of Cornwall, the
    Earl’s residence transferred to Lestwithiel, the sessions to Truro,
    the county gaol and assizes to Bodmin, improvements in the town,
    roads through it 431. Effect of the Reform Bill, view magnificent,
    new iron bridge, statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 432
  Launceston priory, iii. 14, 20, 44, 457――iv. 9, 17, 23, 60, 64. No
    remains of, St. Thomas’s church stands on its site 51.――Prior of, i.
    378 _bis_――iii. 457――iv. 15
  ―――― town, i. 77, 108, 163, 201, 283, 359, 381――iii. 358 _bis_, 388,
    417 _bis_, 456 _ter._, 461――iv. 81.――King’s audit at, i. 78.
    Insurgents march to 86.――Church of St. Stephen’s in, iii. 358.
    Friary in 457. Lines on the gate 295.――North gate of, iv. 51.
    Monastery at 11. Finer buildings in than Truro 71. Road from St.
    Columb’s to 46
  Launston, by Leland, iv. 291
  Laurence, Captain John, ii. 33. Built Trelisick house 32.――Rev.
    Thomas, of St. Winnow, iv. 155, 157
  ―――― St. etymology of name and his history, i. 88
  ―――― St. by Leland, iv. 261
  ―――― St. chapel, i. 88. Duty at 96
  ―――― St. village, i. 89. Court leet and market 90. Fairs 91
  Laurens, Rev. John, iii. 324
  Lavington, Dr. George, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 3, 42. His daughter 42
  Law, Noye’s Grounds, &c. of, iii. 154
  Lawanack parish, i. 21――iv. 68
  Lawanyke, ii. 430
  Lawarran, James, iv. 77
  Lawhitton parish, ii. 417
  Lawrance, St. i. 77
  Lawrence, Humphrey of Launceston, iii. 42
  ―――― St. chapel at Lezant, iii. 42
  ―――― St. village, ii. 385
  Lawry, i. 223――ii. 255.――Miss, iv. 117
  Lawyer, “Noye’s Complete,” iii. 154
  Lax’s tables of latitude and longitude, ii. 359
  Lazarus, parable of, iii. 400
  Lea, family changed their name to Kempthorne, iii. 255, 256
  ―――― farm, iii. 255
  Leach, Simon, i. 222.――Nicholas, iii. 358. Mr. executed 184
  ―――― of Trethewoll, i. 408. Sir Simon and arms 408
  Lee, Francis, ii. 375
  Leeds, Francis and Thomas Osborne, Dukes of, i. 127.――Duke of, ii. 218
  Le Feock, ii. 25
  Lefisick manor, iii. 195, 196
  Legard, i. 370
  Legarike, ii. 256
  Legenda aurea, iv. 117
  Legge, Henry; William 4th Earl of Dartmouth, iii. 206
  Le Greice, Sir Robert, governor of St. Mawe’s castle, ii. 277
  Le Grice, his dispute with Cotterell, ii. 277.――Rev. C. V. iii. 58
    _bis_, 97. Family 90, 243
  Leicester, ii. 76
  Leigha, i. 145
  Leland, i. 73, 79, 146, 266 _bis_, 295, 355, 360, 372, 373――ii. 201,
    239, 402, 411, 425――iii. 5, 15, 16 _bis_, 17, 24, 26 _bis_, 277,
    278, 357, 404, 431――iv. 23, 24, 76 _ter._, 102.――His Itinerary, ii.
    2, 281――iii. 402, 404, 444.――Through Cornwall extracted, Appendix
    VII. iv. 256 to 292.――His inscription on the walls of St. Mawe’s
    castle, ii. 281. Account of Launceston 418.――His Collectanea, iii.
    332 _bis_, 385――iv. 117. Has well described the town of Truro 76, 78
    _bis_, 80. The description 76
  Lelant parish, i. 355, 364――ii. 119, 257 _bis_, 258 _ter._, 260,
    265, 270, 271, 272 _bis_, 284――iii. 46, 339, 384――iv. 52, 53 _ter._,
    58.――Valley in, iii. 59
  LELANT parish, Hals, lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, value of benefice, patronage, rectory, saint. By Editor,
    situation of church, overwhelmed with sand, iii. 5. Mr. Davies
    subscribed towards its erection, several inundations of sand,
    checked by planting rushes, town buried, name, division, Treadreath
    6. Villages, value of benefice, glebe, vicarage house buried, no
    resident clergyman, new house building, appropriation of tithes, St.
    Uny buried here, parish feast, Trembetha 7. Families of Praed,
    Hoskin, and Pawley, the last of the Pawleys, a great heiress, died
    in the workhouse, Praed estate inherited by the Mackworths 8.
    Character of Mr. H. Mackworth Praed 9; and of his son William. The
    Grand Junction canal, its utility, chalk ridges crossing England 10.
    Death of Mr. W. Praed, situation of Trevethow, Trencroben-hill,
    house improved by Mr. H. M. Praed, fine plantations 11. Statistics
    and Geology by Dr. Boase 12. Whele Reath 13
  Lelizike in Probus, iii. 423
  Lemain hamlet, iv. 25. Or Lammana seems to have been of importance 36
  Lemon, i. 58 _bis_. Caroline and Sir William 423.――Harriet, ii. 250.
    Col. John 85. William, his life 81. Saved several lives, was a tin
    smelter 82. Established a mine at Whele Fortune, his marriage 83.
    Made £10,000 by his mine, removed to Truro, principal merchant in
    Cornwall, a classical scholar, sheriff, magistrate, and M.P.,
    received a piece of plate from Frederick, Prince of Wales, called
    the great Mr. Lemon 84. His family, anecdotes of him 85. William,
    jun., 85 _bis_. Sir William 85, 100, 250. Mr. 33 _bis_, 134, 214,
    219.――John, iv. 33. Mr. 89 _bis_. Made a fortune at Truro, began his
    career at Penzance, chosen as partner by Mr. Coster of Truro 89
  ―――― of Carclew, Anna, iii. 230. Anne 249. Sir Charles, improved
    Carclew 230. Caroline, Harriet, and Jane 230. Colonel John, memoir
    of 229. A proficient in music 230. William 229. William, jun. 159.
    Sir William, memoir of 229. Improved Carclew, was a proficient in
    music 230. Sir William 249. Mr. 47. Mr. and Mrs. 229. The great Mr.
    Lemon the younger 159. Family 113
  Lennan, St. parish, ii. 283
  Lennard, i. 266
  Lentegles by Camelford, ii. 372
  Lentyon, ii. 91
  Leo, Pope, ii. 110 _ter._
  Leofric, the first Bishop of Exeter, ii. 69. Chaplain to Edward the
    Confessor 61 _bis_.――The last Bishop of Crediton, iii. 416
  Leofrick, dedicated a church to St. Walburg, iv. 125
  Leon, city of, iii. 285
  Leonard, St. lepers of, at Launceston, ii. 422
  Leonitus leonurus, iv. 182
  Leopards changed to lions, iv. 71
  Lepers, hospital for, i. 89. Laws relating to 90
  Lepomani, Aloysi, Bishop of Seville, i. 82
  Leprosy, its prevalence in England, i. 89
  Lerchdeacon, heir of, iii. 437
  Lerneth, i. 264
  Leryn barton, iv. 29 _bis_
  ―――― creek, iv. 30 _bis_
  Lescaddock castle, iii. 82
  Lescar’s castle, iv. 228
  Lescard, ii. 430
  Leschell, iii. 110
  Lescor, heir of, iii. 140
  Le Seur’s Histoire de l’Eglise et de l’Empire, iv. 117
  Leskeard castle, iii. 169
  ―――― church, i. 33
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 14
  ―――― parish, i. 195――ii. 291 _bis_, 388――iii. 167, 245, 260, 347,
    348 _bis_, 360
  LESKEARD parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, iii. 13. Patronage, value of benefice, appropriation of
    tithes, manor, town, privileges granted 14. Royalty in the duchy,
    charter 15. Elective franchise, great market, ancient castle 16.
    Conduit, extent of the town, a coinage town, defeat of the rebel
    army, market day, town hall, clock erected by Mr. Dolben,
    corporation plate 17. By Editor, trade and market, villas around,
    ib. Improvement of roads and canal, distinguished persons resident
    there, families of Jane and Taunton, Mr. Haydon, Dr. Cardew 18.
    Longitude determined by Mr. Haydon, Mr. Trehawke, his eccentric
    character, left his property to Mr. Kekewich, nunnery of Poor
    Clares, castle, schoolhouse, church 19. Towers taken down,
    appropriation of tithes, patron, monuments in church, memorials of
    Charles 1st, chief proprietors, Editor’s manor of Lamellin, borough,
    Reform Act, etymology 20. Statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    quarries. By Editor, fancied gold ore 21
  Leskeard prison, iii. 246
  ―――― town, iii. 173, 187, 246, 248. A coinage town, ii. 301――iv.
    186, 188.――Account of, iii. 14. Canal from East Looe to 120, 252.
    Road from Looe to 253. From Tor Point 439.――Roman causeway between
    Looe and, iv. 30. Charles first advanced to 185. Parliamentary
    officers brought prisoners to, King’s army marched out of 186
  Leskeret church, ii. 428
  Lesnewith hundred, i. 1, 60, 197, 304, 322――ii. 48, 86, 273, 401,
    402――iii. 22 _bis_, 222, 232, 274, 276, 352――iv. 61 _bis_, 66 _bis_,
    124, 125, 376
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 22, 23
  ―――― parish, i. 304――ii. 273 _bis_――iii. 232, 236
  LESNEWITH parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, hundred divided, value of benefice, incumbent, Trevygham.
    By Editor, Trewonell, iii. 22. Grylls manor, advowson, principal
    proprietor, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 23
  Lestormel castle, iii. 25
  L’Estrange’s Life of Charles 1st, iii. 145
  Lestwithiel parish, iv. 6, 29 _bis_, 30 _bis_, 109, 158
  LESTWITHIEL parish, Hals lost. Situation, boundaries, etymology,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbents, borough, name of the river,
    iii. 24. Ruins of the castle, Trinity chapel, old buildings used
    for the stannary court, Camden’s description, county town, prison
    25. Edmund Earl of Cornwall had his palace here, privileges
    conferred by Earl Richard, antiquity of its franchise, revenues of
    the corporation, damage done by the parliament army 26. The lords
    of the manor 27. Rent payable to the Duke, lies between hills,
    river navigable. By the Editor, locality, its beauty, seat of the
    duchy court, indebted to Richard King of the Romans, palace
    converted into a prison, charter of George 2nd 28. Its invalidity,
    church, town extends beyond the parish, statistics, incumbent,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 29
  Lestwithiel town, ii. 391, 392, 393――iv. 186.――A coinage town, ii.
    301. The residence of the Earl of Cornwall and called the county
    town 431. Mr. Vincent, M.P. for 227. Palace at 392.――Duchy exchequer
    at, iv. 99. Essex marched to 185. Encamped near 185, 186. The King
    did the same 186. Essex was surrounded near 187
  Letcot mine, ii. 378
  Lethbridge family, ii. 397.――Rev. C. H. iii. 461.――Rev. C. of Stoke
    Climsland, iv. 12. Rev. C. of St. Thomas 52
  ―――― of Madford, Christopher, ii. 377
  Letters to and from Mr. Moyle, ii. 76.――Various, to learned persons,
    by Farnaby, iv. 87
  Leucan, St. parish, ii. 283
  Levalra, i. 421
  Levan, St. parish, i. 138, 139――iii. 89, 290, 427, 428, 431
  LEVAN, ST. parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    name, saint, daughter church to St. Burian, iii. 30. By Editor, fine
    scenery, Trereen Dinas, the Loging Rock, natural ibid. Dr. Borlase’s
    account of it, stone removed by Lieut. Goldsmith 31. Sensation
    excited, Editor’s communication with government successful,
    subscription raised by him, replacing of the rock; Lanyon Cromlech
    also replaced, walk from Trereen Dinas to the church, Porth Kernow,
    church, St. Levina 32. Her relics, monument in the church, history
    of Miss Dennis 33. Her poetry, and Sophia St. Clare, a novel 34.
    Tol-Peder-Penwith, singular cavern under it, danger of two visitors,
    disinterestedness of a neighbouring farmer; Bosistow village,
    smallness of poor rate, and its cause 35. Parish feast, statistics;
    Geology by Dr. Boase, interesting construction and romantic
    appearance of the rocks, Logan Rock at Trereen and Tunnel Rock at
    Tol-Peder-Penwith. Editor’s explanation of the name Loging Rock 36
  Leveale, i. 142, 143. Lewis 142. Arms 143
  Leveddon family, ii. 399
  Levela family, iii. 216
  Levignus, Bishop of Kirton, i. 60
  Levina or Levine, St. iii. 30. Her history 32. Relics 33
  Levine Prisklo, by Leland, iv. 271
  Lewannack parish, ii. 226――iii. 40, 335
  LEWANNICK parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name,
    value of benefice, patronage, a poor parish, manor of Trelask, its
    etymology, Lower family, iii. 37. By Editor, gothic ornaments of the
    church and monuments ibid. Villages, manor of Trelaske and its
    possessors, Tinney Hall manor, etymology of Trelaske 38. Pollyfont
    manor, chapel, impropriation, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 39
  Lewellen in Gwythian, ii. 141
  ―――― Rev. Mr. of Minver, iii. 237
  Lewis 14th, King of France, ii. 112, 407. Mr. Killigrew’s repartee
    to 14. His generosity to the English driven on his coast 322
  Ley, i. 10. Hugh 10.――Rev. Samuel, ii. 356.――Rev. Hugh, of Redruth,
    iii. 380.――Rev. T. H. of Rame 379
  ―――― of Ponacumb family, iii. 226
  ―――― of Treworga Vean, Andrew, and arms, i. 396
  Leyden University, iii. 72. In Holland 188
  Lezant parish, ii. 226――iii. 1, 43, 335, 338――iv. 6. 7
  LEZANT parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, dedication, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    Trecarell, Landew, family of Trefusis, iii. 40. Of Herle 41. By
    Editor, hundred, Trecarrel ibid. Ancient hall and chapel at, Landew,
    Mr. Northmore Herle, chapel at Landew, and a third within the
    parish, Carthamartha, church 42. Monuments, statistics, rector,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 43
  Lhuyd, Mr. i. 220.――His Archæologia, iii. 386
  Lhwyd, iv. 8
  Lichfield, St. Chad patron of, ii. 391
  ―――― and Coventry, Bishop of, William Lloyd, iii. 299. William Smith 141
  Lidain, mother of St. Perran, iii. 331
  Lidford borough, i. 170.――Versesm on, iii. 184
  ―――― castle, Devon, iii. 184 _bis_, 185
  ―――― law, iii. 184
  ―――― prisoners, iii. 184
  ―――― town, iii. 185
  Lidgate, John, i. 338
  Lidley, i. 412
  Lifton, Devon, ii. 122, 123
  Lighthouse, on St. Agnes island, ii. 358
  Lighthouses on Lizard Point, account of, ii. 358
  ―――― a triangle of in Guernsey, ii. 358
  Lightning, damage done to a church by, i. 216, 217.――Superstition
    connected with, iii. 48.――Warleggon church suffered from, iv. 130.
    And St. Wenn’s tower 138. Neglect of precautions against, and many
    church towers in Cornwall struck by 130
  Lightstone hundred, i. 369
  Ligusticum Cornubiense, iv. 178
  Lillo, author of George Barnewell, ii. 102, 104
  Lilly, William, i. 84 _bis_
  Limerick diocese, iii. 434
  Limestone burnt for manure, and extremely valuable, ii. 362
  Limmet, Nicholas, ii. 196
  Lincoln, i. 414, 415
  ―――― William Smith, Bishop of, iii. 141
  ―――― Clinton, Earl of, iii. 216
  Lincoln’s Inn, iii. 143, 152, 154
  Lincolnshire, chalk hills in, iii. 10
  Line, Samuel, i. 418
  Linkinhorne parish, iii. 40, 167――iv. 7, 9
  LINKINHORNE parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    name, iii. 43. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, manor of
    Carnadon Prior, the rocky hill 44. By the Editor, manors of Millaton
    and Carnadon Prior, Carraton downs, highest hill but one in
    Cornwall, royalist army there, manor of Trefrize, ib. Many elevated
    points and their prospects, Sharpy Tor, Cheesewring, the Hurlers,
    described in Bond’s sketches of East and West Looe, church rebuilt,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 45
  Linkynhorne, ii. 229
  Linnæus, ii. 331――iii. 49 _bis_
  Linnus, i. 197 _bis_
  Lionesse country, iii. 430. Its destruction 309. Editor’s opinion,
    attempt to restore it by an incantation 310
  Lisart, ii. 116
  Lisbon, iii. 423.――Fortune made at 17.――Packet boats receive
    despatches for, at Falmouth, ii. 11. Regular communication with
    Falmouth 18
  Liskard, by Leland, iv. 280
  Liske, Paganus de, i. 383
  Liskeard, i. 174, 177, 318, 411――ii. 76, 154
  Lisle, Alice de, iii. 92. Family 90.――Sir John, one of the original
    Knights of the Garter and his arms, ii. 137
  ―――― Thomas, Viscount, ii. 108
  Lismanock, ii. 203, 211
  List of the Dukes of Cornwall from the time of Edward 3rd, iv. 373
  Lister Killigrew, Mr. iii. 417 _ter._
  ―――― Martin, of Liston, Staffordshire, ii. 6
  Litchfield, Earl of, his letter, iii. 50
  Lithony, i. 420
  Lithospernum erubescens, iv. 182
  Littlecot, iii. 82
  Littleton, Miss, iv. 161
  ―――― of Lanhidrock, William, and arms, iii. 227
  Livesay of Livesay, i. 302. Mary 302
  Livings, five held by one clergyman, iii. 451. Accounted for by Mr.
    Whitaker 452
  Livingus, Abbot of Tavistock, and Bishop of Crediton, nephew of
    Burwoldus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Lizard or Lizart district, iii. 110, 126, 127, 180, 311, 418, 420,
    421. Etymology 422. Geology 424
  ―――― manor, ii. 126, 358
  ―――― peninsula, ii. 359
  ―――― point, ii. 106, 172, 247, 358 _bis_――iii. 423, 445. Anciently
    called the Ocrinum promontory, i. 20. Geological interest of 330,
    331. Lighthouses on 358. Description of them, latitude and
    longitude 359.――Name, iii. 375. Rocks at 283. High water at 98
  Lizard town, ii. 358
  Llan, Welch, i. 192
  Llan Badern Vaur, iii. 336
  Llewellin, Martin, his epitaph on Sir Beville Grenville, ii. 348
  Lloyd, William, Bishop of St. Asaph, Lichfield and Coventry, and
    Worcester, iii. 299
  Lluyd, ii. 173
  Llwyd, Edward, ii. 122
  Llwyn, Welch, i. 192
  Lo Poole, by Leland, iv. 268
  Lobelia crinus, iv. 182
  Lock, i. 211
  Lockyer of Roach, iii. 82
  Lodeneck, iii. 277
  Loe Bar near Helston, i. 136
  Loffyngeo, ii. 430
  Logan, Logging, or Loging Rock, i. 148――iii. 30, 36, 89――iv.
    164.――Name, iii. 36. Description and history of 31
  Loire, i. 107
  Lombard, Daniel, D.D. ii. 406. Vicar of Lanteglos 401. His history,
    had his living from George 2nd, was member of a German club with
    some of the royal family, visited Mr. Gregor, had no other
    acquaintance in Cornwall, a profound scholar, some anecdotes of him
    407. His death, he left a valuable library to his successors 408
  London, i. 242, 341, 356, 404――ii. 28, 30, 47, 98, 101 _bis_, 177,
    192, 213, 227 _bis_, 266, 267, 407 _bis_――iii. 85, 96, 142, 188,
    189, 264, 288, 316, 450――iv. 86.――Bath free stone brought to, i. 58.
    Rebels approach 87.――Two brothers from Bodmin went to seek their
    fortunes at, ii. 34. The owners of the Virginia fleet in 42. King
    Richard after his imprisonment returned to 179. St. Mellitus, Bishop
    of, its two cathedrals founded by him 288.――Hospital of the Knights
    of St. John in, iii. 78. Society for purchasing advowsons in 399.
    Mr. Peters arrives, as commissioner of grievances from America in
    73. Richard Chiverton Lord Mayor of 162.――Sir John Collet and Sir
    John Percivall Lord Mayors of, iv. 134. Thomas Bradbury, Hugh
    Clopton, Stephen Jennings and John Percivall, sheriffs of 134
  London architecture reaching to Cornwall, iv. 81
  ―――― Bishop of, iii. 73. Mellitus the first Bishop 167
  ―――― bridge, partly built of Cornish stone, iii. 63. High tide at
    98. Time occupied in flowing to it round the southern coast 99
  ―――― coffers, iii. 248
  ―――― Gazette, iii. 143
  ―――― newspapers received daily at Penzance, i. 59
  ―――― port of, iii. 450
  ―――― road, to Falmouth, ii. 104, 355. To Land’s End 317. Through St.
    Bennet’s valley 387. Through Launceston 431
  ―――― stools and tables, iii. 248
  ―――― tower of, ii. 170
  ―――― wall, iii. 298
  Londonderry, Thomas Pitt Earl of, and Ridgeway Earl of, i. 69
  Long, Thomas, iii. 38
  ―――― of Penheale, J. S. i. 379, 380. Margaret 380. Thomas 378, 379.
    Arms 378.――Thomas, ii. 398, 399 _bis_;――or Penhele family, iv. 45
  Longbound, Thomas, i. 373 _ter._, 374
  Longbridge, ii. 120, 176
  Longchamp, William, Bishop of Ely, Regent for Richard 1st, his
    misgovernment, deposed, ii. 177. His escape 178
  Longer of Tregonnebris, Mr. anecdote of, iii. 427
  Longeville, Mr. ii. 120
  Longinus, by the Rev. J. Toup, ii. 266
  Longitude of Pendennis castle, ii. 23. Of the wind-mill near Fowey
    48. Of Landsallas church 399
  ―――― board of, published Meyer’s tables, ii. 222
  Longitudes, derived at sea from the moon’s place, ii. 222
  Longman and Co. iii. 96
  Longporth, now London, i. 338
  Longships, iii. 432
  Longstone downs, ii. 271
  Longunnet barton, iv. 29
  Lonsallos, i. 264
  Loo bar, ii. 129
  ―――― river, i. 179 _bis_, 318, 320――ii. 291.――Source of, i. 184
  Looe bar, iii. 447
  ―――― borough, iii. 119.――Account of 119
  ―――― bridge, iv. 30
  ―――― church, iii. 378
  ―――― cove, iii. 129
  ―――― harbour, iv. 19
  ―――― haven, iii. 118, 119
  ―――― island, iv. 25, 28
  ―――― parish, ii. 85, 400
  ―――― pool, ii. 126, 155, 158――iii. 126, 441. Description of 443.
    Sand bank across 443, 444. Account of the trout in 442, 443
  ―――― river, iii. 119, 121, 128, 245, 252, 291――iv. 23.――Royalty of,
    iii. 442
  ―――― town, i. 379――iv. 29, 30 _ter._, 36, 124.――Marble rock near, i.
    187.――Canal to Leskeard from, iii. 18. Road to 439 _bis_. From
    Leskeard 253.――Trade of, iv. 36
  ―――― East, borough, by Hals, etymology, commerce, chapel, manor,
    charter, members of parliament, jurisdiction, iii. 119. Market,
    fairs, arms, writ 119. Tonkin 120. Editor, Bond’s topographical
    sketches, disfranchisement, canal, projected road over Dartmoor
    ibid. Situation, built on a beach, Mr. Bond 121. John Buller, M.P.
    for 249
  ―――― East, town, iii. 119――iv. 20, 21. A celt found at 33. Bridge
    from West Looe to 20
  ―――― East and West, iii. 229, 246.――Boroughs, iv. 29.――Bond’s
    history of, iii. 246, 378.――Surrounded by water, iv. 35
  ―――― West, borough, corporation, and history, iv. 28. Constitution
    20, 28. Writ 20. Seal and arms 21. Inferior to East Looe 20. Mayor
    and burgesses 34. Poor 35. Admiral Sir Charles Wager, M.P. for
    38.――John Rogers, M.P. for, iii. 445
  ―――― West, down, iv. 29 _bis_, 31, 32, 33. Its inclosure desirable
    34. Part of, let 35. Thunderbolt found in 32
  ―――― West, town, i. 84――iii. 119, 300――iv. 25; or Portuan,
    etymology, bridge to East Looe 28
  Loow, Est and West, by Leland, iv. 290
  Lords Spiritual, their precedency disputed, denied by parliament,
    ii. 181
  Lorraine, St. Dye’s church in, ii. 131
  Lostwhythyel, by Leland, iv. 290
  Lostwithiel, i. 78, 127.――ii. 38, 41 _ter._, 422.――By Leland, iv. 277
  Louer, West, or Consort Hundred, i. 38
  Louis, i. 247 _bis_.――Family, iii. 64 _bis_
  Louisberg harbour, iii. 218
  Love of Penzance, Mr. iii. 84
  Lovell, John, i. 246
  Lovice, William, William, Leonard, iv. 41
  Low Countries, iv. 86
  Lowbrygge, iv. 255
  Lower, Dr. Richard, Thomas, i. 257.――Sir Nicholas, ii. 372 _bis_,
    373 _sex._, 374, 376. Lady 373. Major 375. Family 372, 373, 397.
    Distinguished 376.――Humphrey, iii. 358. Thomas 38. Family 37, 38,
    223. Monuments to 225.――Dr., Physician to Charles II. and his three
    daughters, iv. 94
  ―――― of Trelaske, in Lawanack, Sir Nicholas, his marriage and dau.
    William, and William, iv. 156
  ―――― of Tremeer, Richard, M. D. his works, iv. 98. Sir William, his
    works 97. His death 98
  ―――― of St. Wenow, or Winnow, Sir Nicholas, iii. 200. Heir 201.
    Family 133.――Mr. iv. 94
  ―――― Town, of Lambrigan, iii. 315
  Lowlands, iii. 240
  Lowlog river, source of, iv. 237
  “Lucan’s Pharsalia,” notes on, iv. 87
  Lucas, Elizabeth, i. 222
  ―――― of Warwickshire, Mary, iii. 147
  Lucca, iv. 126
  Lucian, ii. 76
  Lucies manor, account of, ii. 358
  Lucius, i. 335 _ter._
  Lucy family, iv. 121; or Lacan, Richard 77, 81 _quat._, 82 _bis_,
    83, 84 _bis_
  ―――― of Charlecote, George, bought the manor of Fowey, M.P. for it,
    ii. 46
  Lud, King, ii. 50
  Luddra, Robert, iii. 253
  Ludduham, now Lugian-lese manor, ii. 257. Account of 258
  Ludewin, or Ludevaulles, by Leland, iv. 265
  LUDGEAN, LUDGVAN, or LUDGVEN, parish, Hals lost. Situation,
    boundaries, name, value of benefice, patron, manor of Ludgian
    lease, iii. 46. By Editor, extent and consequence of the manor
    ibid. Treassow, Castle-an-Dinas, very lofty, produces china-clay,
    entrenchment, Rosevithney, Trowell, the mine of Whele Fortune,
    well resorted to for restoring sight 47. Collurian farm, Varfull,
    belonging to the Davy family, notice of Sir Humphrey Davy, the
    church, rectory house, church tower, a pinnacle thrown down by
    lightning, imputed to a perturbed spirit, a legend of St. Ludgvan,
    and a stream of miraculous water 48. Dr. William Borlase, rector,
    his learning and works, diploma from Oxford 49. Earl of
    Litchfield’s letter upon it, extract from the university official
    register 50. Memoir of Dr. Borlase from the Biographical
    Dictionary 51. List of his works 52. His death, correspondence
    with pope, communications to the royal society, pupils, tomb,
    inscription illegible, Editor’s reflections on him in Greek, his
    two sons 53. Two rectors since, present incumbent, chief
    proprietors of land, parish feast, statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 54. Ludgvan stone, marshes 55
  Ludgian, ii. 260
  ―――― or Ludgvan Lease manor, iii. 123. Account of 46 _bis_
  Ludgvan parish, i. 355――ii. 118 _bis_, 121 _bis_, 169――iii. 5,
    343――iv. 52, 53 _bis_, 54.――Rev. John Stephens, rector of, ii.
    270.――Rev. H. Praed, iii. 9, 54
  ―――― St. a stream endowed with miraculous powers by, iii. 48
  ―――― stone, iii. 55
  Ludlow of London, i. 255. Elizabeth 259
  Luffe, ii. 427
  Lugacius, Bishop, iii. 331
  Lugad, Bishop, iii. 331
  Luggan, Mr. ii. 252
  Luggyan Lese manor, ii. 258
  Luke, Robert, iii. 83. Dr. Stephen 96, 337 _bis_
  ―――― of Trevilles, William, and family, iii. 406
  ―――― St. ii. 240. His day 117, 276
  Lukey, Mr. i. 271
  Lunar tables, ii. 223
  Lundy island, i. 188.――View of, ii. 49
  Lupton, in Brixham parish, Devon, iv. 156
  Lupus, Bishop of Troyes, ii. 64
  ―――― St. ii. 73, 74
  ―――― Hugh, Earl of Chester, iv. 125
  Lure, i. 221
  Lurginus, Bishop of Kirton, iv. 62
  Lusus naturæ, supposed, ii. 297
  Luther, Martin, i. 312
  Lutterell, i. 247
  ―――― of Polsew, i. 393
  Luttrell, i. 400, 402.――Sir Andrew, iii. 103
  ―――― of Dunster castle, Andrew and his daughter, iii. 342
  Luxemberg, John of, King of Bohemia, iv. 72
  Luxilian church, iv. 100
  ―――― parish, ii. 93, 155, 384, 390; or Luxillian, iii. 391, 395
  LUXILIAN or LUXULIAN parish, Hals’s MS. lost. Situation, boundaries,
    name, change of saint, iii. 55. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, manor of Prideaux, etymology, Prideaux castle, and family
    56. By Editor, chief landowners, Rashleigh family, situation of
    church, taste of Mr. Grylls the present vicar, beauty of church and
    tower, room in the tower, archives preserved there in the civil
    wars, vale leading to St. Blazey bridge, Tonkin’s Geology, “Lyell’s
    Principles of Geology,” parish, statistics 57. Geology by Dr. Boase,
    stream-works, quality of the tin, subterranean trees and plants 58.
    By Editor, unsightliness of Cornish valleys, Mr. H. M. Praed
    restored a valley in Lelant to beauty 59
  Luxmoore, Rev. Coryndon, ii. 408
  Luxton, John, i. 399
  Luxulion, i. 52
  Lyda, or Lides, St. island, iv. 230, 266
  Lydcott, iii. 252
  Lyddra, Robert, iii. 257
  Lydford Brygge, iv. 255
  Lyell, Charles, on Geology, iii. 57
  Lyle, John, rang the bells on the accession of George III. George
    IV. and William IV. iv. 18
  Lynar, or Lyner river, iii. 119, 437, 438
  Lyne, Rev. Charles, of Roach, iii. 401. Rev. Richard, of Little
    Petherick 335. Rev. Dr. of Mevagissey, his singularities 194. Mr.
    made a fortune at Lisbon 17. His grandfather 19
  Lynkinhorne, ii. 430
  Lyonness, i. 198
  Lyskerde, ii. 430
  Lysons, i. 135, 146, 356, 369, 399, 402――ii. 86, 87, 91, 100, 147,
    149 _bis_, 153, 217, 229, 231, 232, 252, 256, 281, 294, 330, 348,
    358, 362, 363 _bis_, 383, 388, 395, 397 _bis_, 400, 404, 412,
    415――iii. 7 _bis_, 19, 20, 38, 46, 77, 90, 117 _bis_, 126 _bis_, 138
    _bis_, 150, 172, 192, 223 _bis_, 232, 234, 239, 240, 248, 255 _bis_,
    258, 261, 274, 276 _bis_, 288, 289, 295, 309 _bis_, 332, 334, 335,
    342, 346 _bis_, 350 _bis_, 352, 372 _bis_, 373, 398, 399 _bis_, 405,
    406, 419, 424, 427, 439 _bis_, 445, 458――iv. 3, 4, 9 _bis_, 16
    _bis_, 26, 41, 44, 51, 60, 62, 64, 65, 67, 97, 107, 114, 121, 127,
    130, 136, 141.――His Cornwall, i. 228, 266 _bis_, 315 _bis_, 340――ii.
    343――iii. 80――iv. 141, 163.――His Magna Brit. ii. 47――iv. 26.――His
    account of the repulse of the French from Fowey, ii. 46. His
    descents, &c. of manors 47
  Lythe, John Robert, iii. 387
  Lyttelton, Christiana, and George, Lord, i. 69
  Lyttleton family, ii. 383

  Mabe hill, iii. 63
  ―――― parish, i. 137, 236, 416――ii. 92, 94, 104――iii. 64――iv. 2
  MABE parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, name, iii.
    59. Ancient jurisdiction, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    amount of land tax, Tremough, Tremayne 60. By Tonkin, name, Carnsew,
    and family, removed to Trewoon, Carverth 61. Tremogh, large house
    built, Hantertavas 62. By Editor, Hals’s mistaken etymology of
    Tremogh, Tremogh sold 62. Trees cut down, granite quarries, road
    turned, rare plant, origin of the Tremayne family, statistics 63.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 64
  MABEN, or Mabin, St. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    ancient state, value of benefice, patron, iii. 64. Incumbent, land
    tax, St. Mabiana, Collquite, Treblithike, Haligan 65. Penwyne 66.
    Tonkin, nothing new. By Editor, Tredeathy, church monuments 66. Mr.
    Peters, his controversy with Warburton, his ancestry, and life 67.
    Traits of character, extracts from his meditations 68. Opinions on
    the Book of Job 69. Remarks on Hugh Peters, his history 71.
    Settlement in America, a popular preacher, deputed to England 72.
    Entered the parliament service, obtained Lambeth palace and Laud’s
    library, his death 73. Parish statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 74
  Mabiana, St. iii. 65
  Mabilia, a countess, monument to, ii. 419
  Mabin, i. 2
  Mabyn, St. church, iv. 135
  ―――― St. parish, i. 84, 367, 371, 375――ii. 150 _bis_, 332――iv. 93, 95
  Macarmicke, Colonel, i. 208
  Macclesfield, Fitton Gerard, Earl of, i. 67.――Lord, iii. 378 _bis_
  Macculloch, Dr. ii. 115
  M Gregor, i. 13
  Machinery, curious piece of, i. 55
  Mackworth, Mr. singular story of, and family, iii. 9
  Macpherson, the producer of Ossian, ii. 405. His quarrel with
    Johnson 406
  Madan, a British king, iii. 79
  Madaran, or Maddern parish, ii. 118, 122, 174
  Madarne church, i. 296
  ―――― parish, iv. 164 _bis_
  Maddarns, St. or Maddern well, account of, iii. 91. Extraordinary
    cure from 79
  Maddern, John and William, iii. 83
  ―――― parish, iii. 46, 242 _bis_, 243, 283, 289, 425 _bis_
  MADDERN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, saint, unknown, iii. 78.
    St. Maddarn’s well, a cripple cured by it, Alverton 79. Mayne
    Screffes, inscription on the stone, Landithy 80. Penzance, town
    burnt by the Spaniards, charter, taken and pillaged by the
    parliament army 81. Rich booty, a coinage town, principal
    inhabitants, arms, writ, Lescaddock castle 82. By Tonkin, a
    vicarage, patron, incumbent ibid. Penzance, a separate parish, but
    daughter-church, incorporated, corporation in 1620. By the Editor,
    situation of the church, its connection with the Templars,
    monuments, mild air of the Mount’s Bay, Castle Horneck 83. Dr.
    Walter Borlase, memoir of him, built the house at Castle Horneck,
    Trereife, memoir of Dr. Frank Nicholls 84. Trengwainton used as a
    farm-house, Sir Rose Price, the present owner, has made it a
    splendid residence, origin of the Price family 85. History of Mr.
    Vinicombe 87. His picture, Rosecadgwell, Nanceolvern, Poltare,
    Trenear, notice of Captain H. P. Tremenheere 88. Rose hill,
    Lariggan, Mr. Pope and the Vatican, Lanyon, a cromleigh 89.
    Cromleigh at Malfra, and others in the parishes of Morva and
    Zennor, conjectures respecting them, description, etymology,
    Landithy, impropriation of tithes, patronage of the vicarage,
    Alverton 90. Its magnificence lost, Maddern well, its copiousness,
    Penzance flourishing, its gradual rise 91. Market house, a coinage
    town, adverse events of the civil war, pier, character of the
    corporation 92. Chapel of ease, endowed by Mr. Tremenheere, new
    church, exertions of Mr. Vibert, Mr. Edward Giddy, and the
    Tremenheere family, for the benefit of the town 93. New market
    house, distinguished families of the place, the Tonkins, Sir
    Humphrey Davy, introduced by the Editor to Dr. Beddoes 94. His
    Life by Dr. Paris, Dr. Batten, Mr. Carne, Dr. Boase 95. Mr. Thomas
    Giddy, Dr. Luke, Admiral Pellew, a grammar-school, Editor there
    under Dr. Parkins 96. Mr. Morris, the present master, Penzance
    much resorted to by invalids, Mr. E. Giddy’s observation on the
    climate, Dr. Paris’s medical account of it, Algerine corsair
    wrecked there 97. Inhabitants alarmed, afterwards visited the
    strangers, they were sent home in a man-of-war, latitude and
    longitude of Penzance church, establishment of the port, and at
    various other places 98. Parish statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    the Wherry mine 99. Sand bank and submarine forest, parish covered
    with metallic veins, account of the Cornwall Geological Society at
    Penzance 100
  Madders parish, ii. 284
  Madford near Launceston, iii. 337
  Madras, Fort St. George, and government house at, iv. 11
  Madron parish, iii. 245
  Maen Tol, i. 141
  Magdalen Ball in Gluvias, iv. 3
  ―――― college, Oxford, iii. 87
  ―――― hall, Oxford, Mr. Lake entered of, ii. 389
  Mahomet’s character of Thomas Paleolagus, ii. 368
  Mahometans, ii. 37
  Mahon, Sir Reginald, ii. 376. Family 339, 353, 354, 396. Property
    353, 376.――Family, iii. 8. Property 207
  Mahun family, iv. 54
  Maids, the nine, iv. 2
  Maidstone frigate, iii. 186.――Commanded by Captain Penrose, ii. 25.
    Sailed to the Sound 27
  Mail coaches established, i. 57
  Maine and Loire, department of, in France, iv. 105
  Maiowe, Philip, iii. 123
  Majendie, Ashurst, instituted the Geological Society of Cornwall,
    iii. 100. His Geology of the Lizard 424
  Major, Peter, of Foye, ii. 110. Mr. 43. Mr. a tobacco merchant 43
  Maker parish, ii. 250, 251――iii. 374
  MAKER parish, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, Mount Edgecumbe, history of
    the Edgecumbe family, Sir Richard an adherent of Henry 7th, iii.
    101. Obliged to abscond, concealed himself in a cave, and deceived
    his pursuers by throwing his cap into the sea, rewarded by Henry
    with the lands of Bodrigan 102. Built a chapel in commemoration of
    his escape, he or his father founded a Benedictine priory, family
    have spent their fortune in service of the crown 103. Carew’s
    description of Mount Edgecumbe, part of it and of Millbrook in
    Devon 104. Millbrook once possessed of the elective franchise,
    inhabitants in Elizabeth’s time addicted themselves to piracy,
    Cremble passage, its danger 105. Tonkin does not notice this
    parish. By Editor, beautiful situation, church ibid. Signals from
    it, observations on signals, value of the benefice 106. Inceworth,
    Millbrook formerly an important town, government naval brewhouses
    removed, advantage of the new buildings, Vaultershome, or West
    Stonehouse, now Mount Edgecumbe, its beauty 107. Kingston and
    Cawsand, Plymouth harbour, divisions of, the Breakwater or
    artificial reef, description of 108. Comparison of its bulk,
    weight, and labour with the great Pyramid of Egypt, parish
    statistics, population fluctuates with war or peace, vicar 109.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 110
  Makertone manor, ii. 251
  Malachi, the Hebrew prophet, ii. 224
  Malachy, St. Archbishop of Armagh, ii. 225
  Malaga, i. 161
  Malivery, Helvethus, iv. 41
  Mallett, i. 262
  Malmsbury, iv. 155
  ―――― William of, iii. 385――iv. 96.――His chronicle, i. 407
  Malo, St. iii. 257. His day 258
  Malo’s, St. ii. 123
  Malta island, i. 411
  ―――― knights of, i. 411 _bis_
  Mama Tidy, a name of St. Udith, iv. 93
  Man, Isle of, i. 339. King of 339
  Manaccan parish, i. 417――iii. 124, 127, 128, 138
  MANACCAN parish, situation, boundaries, name modern, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land tax, iii. 110. Once
    called Minster, alien monasteries, etymology, Kestell 111. By
    Tonkin, name. By Editor, etymology, church pleasantly situated, town
    neat, vicarage house good, Mr. Polwhele 112. Helford, passage at,
    Kestell, Halvose, statistics, parish feast, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase, titanium found in the streams 113
  Manackan, i. 38
  Manacles point, ii. 331
  Manaton, account of by Hals, ii. 230. By Tonkin ibid. By Whitaker
    and Lysons 231
  ―――― of Manaton family, ii. 230. Francis 230 _bis_. Henry 230. Arms
    and memorials in church 231.――Francis, iii. 2――iv. 64. Family 65
  Mane mine, i. 226
  Manely manor, iv. 112
  ―――― Coleshill manor, iv. 114
  Maneton, Mr. entertained Charles 1st, iii. 42
  Manley, John and Mrs. iii. 347
  ―――― Coleshill, i. 319
  Manlius, iii. 71
  Manly, John, iv. 74
  Mann, Rev. H. of St. Mawgan, iii. 138
  Mannering, i. 350
  Manning family, iii. 255
  Mannington, Sampson, iii. 358
  Manor courts, proceedings of, iv. 55. Subjects of presentment 56
  Manufactory for Spa ornaments, ii. 361
  Manuscripts in the British Museum, extracts from, iii. 409
  Manwaring, Charlotte, i. 67
  Mapowder, i. 402――iv. 161 _bis_
  Marazion, the name of St. Hilary parish, ii. 200, 214, 215 _quat._,
    224 _bis_
  ―――― borough and manor, ii. 170
  ―――― parish, iii. 289――iv. 10.――Road to Helston from, iii. 446. From
    Redruth to 308.――Name explained, iv. 316
  March ab Meircyon, i. 338
  March, Earl of, i. 168 _bis_
  March and Ulster, Roger Mortimer Earl of, i. 64
  Margaret, Queen, i. 169.――Took sanctuary in Beaulieu abbey, ii. 329
  ―――― St. family, ii. 362
  Margaret’s, St. church, Westminster, ii. 98
  Margate, high water at, iii. 98
  Marghessen foos, iii. 323 _bis_, 324 _ter._ Account of 323
  Marham or Marwyn church, manor of, iii. 116, 117
  Marham Church parish, i. 133――ii. 413――iii. 254, 352――iv. 12, 15,
    131, 152
  MARHAM CHURCH parish, situation and boundaries, name and antiquity,
    the Conqueror’s charter of appropriation, iii. 114. Confirmed by the
    pope, number of vicarages in England, and in Cornwall, Walesbury
    115. Longford hill 116. By Tonkin, name, value, manor of Marwyn
    Church ibid. By Editor, antiquity of the church, manor, Walesborough
    manor, Hilton manor, Wood-Knole, patron, nature of the soil,
    abundance of wood 117. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 118
  Marhasdeythyou, or Market Jew, by Leland, iv. 287
  Marianus the historian, ii. 403
  Mark St. his day, iv. 140
  ―――― well, i. 199
  Marke of Woodhill, i. 143
  Markesju, by Leland, iv. 264
  Market Jew, ii. 200
  Marks of St. Wenn, Miss, iii. 237
  Markwell manor, ii. 363
  Marlborough, ii. 76
  ―――― administration, ii. 217
  ―――― castle, ii. 179
  ―――― Duke of, ii. 307.――John Churchill, i. 126 _bis_,
    234.――Churchill, iii. 217, 297.――Henrietta, Duchess, i. 126
  Marney of Colquita, Henry first Lord Marney, i. 369
  ―――― of Essex, Henry, family and arms, iii. 65.――Family, iv. 22
  Maroons of Jamaica, treaty with, iii. 300
  Marperion rock, iii. 73
  Marre, Lord, ii. 9
  Marrifield, i. 215
  Mars, i. 295.――Camelford sacred to, ii. 403
  Marsh, Rev. William, ii. 134
  Marshal, Earl, his court, iii. 129, 130 _ter._
  Marshall, Miss, iii. 239
  Martial’s epigrams, notes on, iv. 87
  Martin, i. 386. John, Archbishop of Canterbury 87.――John and Thomas,
    iii. 323
  Martin of Hurston, Anne and John, iii. 186
  ―――― of Pittletown, Dorset, family, iii. 186
  ―――― St. his feast and history, ii. 125.――His day, iii. 310
  ―――― Bishop of Tours in France, iii. 118, 126, 127, 138. His history
    122. Festival 127
  ―――― Pope and martyr, iii. 126
  Martin’s, St. church, iii. 252 _bis_. At Leskeard 16
  ―――― fields and woods, i. 15
  ―――― island, iv. 174. Extent of 175
  ―――― parish by Looe, i. 320――ii. 265――iii. 13, 245.――Its church and
    rectory, ii. 266
  MARTIN’S, ST. parish, near Looe, situation, boundaries, saint, value
    of benefice, patron, iii. 118. Incumbent, land tax, East Looe town,
    etymology, haven, chapel, charter, jurisdiction, market and fairs,
    arms and writ, Kevorall 119. Tonkin’s quotation of Willis, and
    conjecture respecting the name of the chapel 120. By Editor,
    reference to Bond’s Sketches, elective franchise lost, canal to
    Leskeard, granite hills ibid. Road over the hills, projected new
    road, expence will probably prevent it, situation of East Looe, Mr.
    Bond 121. History of St. Martin of Tours, legends of him, his death
    122. Festival, advowson of the living, monuments in the church. Dr.
    Mayo, statistics 123. Geology by Dr. Boase 124
  ―――― St. parish, in Meneage, i. 301――ii. 318――iii. 110, 127, 128
  MARTIN’S ST. parish, in Meneage, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, daughter to Mawgan, founder, patron, incumbent,
    land tax, Tremayne, iii. 124. Mudgan 125. By Tonkin, saint, daughter
    to Mawgan, value, patron, incumbent 126. By Editor, Tremayne,
    Helnoweth nunnery, doubtful, Meneage district, Hals’s history of St.
    Martin, pope and martyr ibid. Parish feast, notice of Pope St.
    Martin, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, the dry tree 127
  Martin, St. of Tours, ii. 125
  ―――― ancient chapel of, i. 15.――Church, ii. 125
  Martine’s, St. isle, iv. 266
  Martyn, i. 28.――Thomas, ii. 221 _bis_. His map of Cornwall ibid. and
    iii. 454.――W. W. iii. 255
  Martyn’s, St. parish in Kerrier, iii. 61
  Martyr’s church, iii. 180
  Martyrology, iii. 385
  Mary, Queen, ii. 255, 336, 404, 423――iii. 103, 104, 125, 133, 140,
    370――iv. 2, 140.――A design to rob her Exchequer, ii. 198
  ―――― 2nd, called Mary Take-all, ii. 15
  ―――― Rose frigate, loss of, ii. 341, 344
  ―――― the Virgin, ii. 276――iv. 26
  ―――― St. iii. 285.――Truro church, dedicated to, iv. 80, 81
  ―――― St. bell, iii. 210
  ―――― St. chapel, Dublin cathedral, iv. 147
  ―――― St. chapel in Quethiock, iii. 373
  ―――― St. church, Savoy, London, ii. 98
  ―――― St. island, iv. 172, 174, 230. Extent of 175
  ―――― St. manor, ii. 275
  ―――― St. parish, old Truro, iv. 92
  ―――― St. of Grace’s Abbey, i. 134
  ―――― St. de Theresa, i. 83
  ―――― Magdalen, St. a chapel at Trecarrell, dedicated to, iii. 42
  ―――― Magdalen, St. church at Launceston, ii. 417, 420――iv.
    132――Parish, statistics, ii. 432
  ―――― de Plym, St. ii. 2, 275, 276
  ―――― de Vale, St. convent, prior of, ii. 275 _bis_, 276. Monastery
    2.――Priory, iii. 395
  ―――― Wick, St. parish, ii. 232――iii. 114
  ―――― Wike, St. i. 215
  Maskelyne, Rev. Dr. Nevill, astronomer royal, his voyage to St.
    Helena, published Meyer’s Tables, ii. 222. Devised the Nautical
    Almanack 223
  Mason, Rev. J. H. of Treneglos and Warbstow, iv. 63.――The poet, i. 71
  Masterman of Restormel, William, i. 244 _bis_
  Matilda, Queen, ii. 211 _ter._
  Matthew of St. Kew family, arms, ii. 337
  Matthew Paris, i. 414
  ―――― of Westminster, his story of the Irish sailing to England in an
    ox-skin boat, ii. 324
  ―――― St. his Gospel, ii. 168
  Matthews of Tresangar, i. 225. John 383 _bis_
  Maugan, i. 209, 212, 301――ii. 155
  ―――― in Meneage, ii. 136
  Maunder, i. 256, 396.――Henry, ii. 195.――Miss, iv. 116
  ―――― of Lanhedrar, Mary, Priscilla, and Thomas, i. 420
  ―――― of Rosecorla, Edward, i. 420
  Maurandia Barclayana, iv. 182
  ―――― semperflorens, iv. 182
  Maurice, Prince, iii. 44.――A commissioner for the King, iv. 189
  Mausa, St. by Leland, iv. 289
  Maw’s, St. castle, inscription made by Leland at, iv. 274
  Mawe, St. his history, ii. 280
  Mawes, St. borough, ii. 279. Account of and arms 276
  ――――’s, St. castle, ii. 1, 2, 27, 279, 280. History of 280. And of
    its governors 276. Its governors and officers salaried by the crown 278
  ――――’s, St. manor, ii. 275
  ――――’s, St. town, ii. 2, 17
  ――――’s, St. village, ii. 280
  Mawgan, John de, iii. 148
  ―――― of Essex family, and arms, iii. 148
  ―――― or St. Mawgan parish in Kerrier, or Mawgan Meneage, ii.
    126――iii. 110, 124, 126, 148, 257, 324, 332, 419
  ―――― in Pider, i. 161, 230, 404, 407――ii. 256――iii. 398. The poor of 153
  ―――― St. iii. 148
  ―――― St. church, iii. 132
  MAWGAN, St. in Meneage parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    ancient name, iii. 127. Value of benefice, patron, founder,
    incumbent, land tax, description of Meneage district, its
    fertility and breeds of cattle, Goonhilly downs, stones on them,
    Carmenow 128. Its etymology, and the family of Carmenow, singular
    trial between them and the Lord Scrope for their arms 129. Reasons
    on each side 130. Earl Marshal’s sentence, Carmenow’s displeasure
    131. Domestic chapel, burial place and monuments, cross-logged
    figures used before the crusades 132. Reskymer family, Trelowarren
    133. Vyvyan family 134. Tonkin has no additions. By Editor, the
    three distinguished families, Sir Richard Vyvyan a Cavalier 135.
    Committed to the Tower by George 1st, had a daughter born there
    136. Sir R. R. elected for Bristol, antiquity and splendour of
    Trelowarren house, view in Dr. Borlase’s Natural History, manor of
    Carmenow, account of the trial in Anecdotes of Heraldry 137.
    Another controversy for the same coat, church, monuments, patron
    of benefice, saint, feast, statistics, rector, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase, the dry tree 138
  MAWGAN, ST. parish in Pyder, by Hals, boundaries, ancient name,
    antiquity of the parish, founder, dedication, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, manor of Lanherne, iii. 139. Arundell
    family 140. Origin of their arms 142. Mr. Bishop, a Roman Catholic
    prelate, Carnanton, history of Attorney-General Noye 143. Approved
    the ship-money tax 144. Hammon Le Strange’s character of him, his
    death and family, amusing story of the court dining with him 145.
    Ben Jonson’s lines, and Charles’s answer, anagram, Noye, a
    promoter of the Civil War, counselled the imprisonment of the
    members of parliament 146. Densill, Densill barrow, Chapel Garder,
    Densill family 147. Tonkin, the saint, an Irish Missionary,
    patron, ancient name 148. Manor of Lanhearne, Camden and Carew
    upon the Arundells 149. Called the Great Arundells 150. By Editor,
    etymology of Arundell, Lysons’s notice of the family, Popery
    fostered at Lanhearne, house now a Carmelite nunnery ibid.
    Situation of church, monuments 151. Manor of Carnarton, memoir of
    the Noyes, the Attorney-General’s will 152. Some of his works
    published 153. List of them 154. A cause he gained for his
    college, their thanks 155. His picture, a copy of it presented by
    the Editor to Exeter college, his family, marriage contract of his
    son Humphrey 156. Issue of the marriage 159. Works of the Rev.
    Cooper Willyams, anecdote of his grandfather’s marriage, Hals’s
    abuse of Colonel Noye, parish statistics, and rector 160. Geology
    by Dr. Boase, parish feast 161
  Mawnan parish, i. 135, 137, 236
  MAWNAN, parish of, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    court baron, barton of Penwarne, iii. 74. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land-tax, Penwarne and family 75. By Tonkin, manor of
    Trevose ibid. Advowson appendant to it, Penwarne 76. By Editor,
    Lysons’s account of the manors, Tresore, patron of living and
    incumbent, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, interesting rocks,
    Rosemullion Head 77
  Mawnoun, St. church, by Leland, iv. 269
  Maws, St. J. Tredinham, M.P. for, i. 416
  Maxentius, i. 237 _bis_
  Maximian, Emperor of Rome, iv. 100
  Maximilian, Emperor, wars against the Turks under, ii. 342, 344
  Maximus, the 2nd Emperor, ii. 37
  May, i. 78, 414.――Elizabeth and Rev. Dr. iii. 356. Rev. Mr. of St.
    Mewan 196.――Rev. Mr. of Tywardreth and St. Mewan, iv. 102
  ―――― of High cross, i. 45
  ―――― of Truro, i. 396
  Maye, Dr. iv. 74. William 187
  Mayer, Tobias, of Gottingen, ii. 222. His tables 222, 223. His widow
    allowed a premium of £3000, 223
  Maynard, i. 36――ii. 361. John 196. Sir John Sergeant 362 _bis_.――Sir
    John, iii. 5, 405, 406
  Mayne, Rev. Cuthbert, iii. 357, 360, 369, 370 _bis_. Suffered death 358
  ―――― Screffes, iii. 80; or Scriffer, ii. 284
  Mayo or Mayow, John, M.D. iii. 123 and note 250 _bis_. Memoir of
    251. His works 251, 252. Philip of Looe 250 _quat._ P. W. 250.
    Family 223, 250, 252. Monuments to 253
  Mayo of Clevyan, ii. 198
  ―――― of Truro, John, ii. 302
  Mayors of Exeter, ii. 189, 196
  Mayow, Dr. iv. 30. Mr. 74. Family 37
  ―――― of Bray, i. 354
  Mayson, Rev. Charles and Rev. Peter, rectors of Lezant, iii. 43
  Mead, Dr. iii. 85
  Mean in Sannen, seven Saxon Kings said to have met at, ii. 284
  ―――― village, iii. 433, 435. Story connected with 433
  Meath county, iii. 86
  Medhop of Trenant, i. 320 _bis_
  Median castles, ii. 423
  Mediterranean sea, iv. 168.――Regular communication with Falmouth,
    ii. 18
  Medland of Tremail in St. Petherwyn, iii. 137
  Megara in Greece, Bishop of, i. 75.――Thomas Vivian, Bishop of, iii.
    279.――Bishopric, arms of, i. 75, 94――iv. 161
  Megavissey, i. 413
  Mehinnet parish, ii. 371
  Mein Egles rocks, transport lost on, ii. 326
  Melaleuca hypericifolia, iv. 182
  Melania, St. iii. 164, 165
  Melanius, St. iii. 257
  Melgisy manor, iii. 382
  Melhuish, near Kirton, Devon, etymology, iii. 135
  ―――― Mr. ii. 97
  ―――― of Northan, Devon, family, iii. 61
  ―――― of Penryn, Jane, iii. 134. Thomas 61, 134
  Melianthus, iv. 182
  ―――― coccineus major, iv. 182
  Melianus, King or Duke of Cornwall, iii. 59, 224
  Melina, St. iii. 257, 258
  Meliorus, St. iii. 224
  Mellen, St. i. 310
  Mellin, St. parish, ii. 309
  Mellingy bridge, account of, iii. 327
  ―――― mill, iii. 326
  Mellion, i. 316.――St. parish, ii. 375, or Mellyn, iii. 161, 345,
    347, 371
  MELLION, OR MELLYN, ST. parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Newton
    manor, Mr. Coryton, one of the members imprisoned by Charles 1st,
    iii. 161. Coryton family, Crocadon 162. John Trevisa translated the
    Bible, comparison with Wickliffe’s and Tyndall’s, Westcot,
    Pentillie, or Pillaton 163. Sir James Tillie’s singular will 164. By
    Tonkin, saint, patron, Newton ibid. By Editor, Hals’s history of St.
    Melania, Coryton family 165. Vindication of Sir James Tillie 166.
    St. Mellitus, Bede’s life of him, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 167
  Mellior, St. i. 151
  Mellitus, first Bishop of London, afterwards Archbishop of
    Canterbury, iii. 167
  ―――― St. Pope Gregory’s letter to, ii. 288
  Mellyn, St. i. 409
  Menabilly, account of, iv. 101, 107
  Menadarva, i. 161 _quat._, 164
  Menage, i. 192
  Menagwins, etymology and possessors of, i. 43
  Mendicant friars, i. 83――iv. 145
  Meneage, i. 350.――Part of Kerryer hundred, ii. 358
  ―――― district, in Lizard, iii. 257, 419, 422. Described 128
  Menevia, St. David, Archbishop of, iii. 292.――Bishopric, i. 305
  Menfre, i. 2
  Menheniot manor, iii. 170
  ―――― or Menhinnet parish, iii. 13, 373
  MENHENIOT parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, iii. 167.
    Manor, jurisdiction, ancient name, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, etymology, the manor, Poole, described by
    Carew 168. Fair, Tencreek, an oven fourteen feet in diameter,
    unknown tree, Trehavock 169. Curtutholl, Trewint, Dr. Moorman
    first taught the offices of religion in English, the Latin
    service, books called in, hospital for lepers 170. By Tonkin,
    Pool, Menheniot or Tregelly manor ibid. By the Editor, size of the
    church, its tower and monuments, patron of the benefice, the
    incumbent to be of Exeter college, vicarage endowed with the great
    tithes, the incumbents, Mr. Holwell and his works 171. Cartuther,
    other places noticed by Lysons, the most fertile parish in the
    county, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, Clicker Tor 172. The
    Geology interesting. By the Editor, errica vagans, phenomena of
    flowers, no wild rose in the southern hemisphere, nor heath in
    America 173. Sir Isaac Newton’s discoveries, remarks on the system
    of nature and succession of the various species 174
  Menhynet, ii. 59
  Menhynyet, i. 409
  Mentz, Archbishopric, founded by St. Boniface, iv. 126
  Menvor, i. 168
  Menwhilly, ii. 91
  Menwinnion, ii. 241
  Meny, St. iii. 190
  Mepham, Simon, Archbishop of Canterbury, iii. 115
  Meran, St. iii. 177
  Merchant Tailor’s school, ii. 407
  Mercia, King of, i. 49.――Penda, King of, ii. 284――iii. 284
  Merewenna, i. 2
  Merina, St. iii. 177 _bis_
  Merionethshire, i. 382
  Merivale priory, i. 27
  Merlin, i. 330 _bis_, 331, 322 _bis_, 334, 339.――His prophecy, iii.
    433.――Of Arthur, i. 326, 336 _bis_
  Merran, St. parish, ii. 265
  MERRAN, ST. Merin, Meryn, or Merryn parish, by Hals, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name and etymology, church, cemetery of St.
    Constantine, converted to a dwelling house, modern church, St.
    Constantine’s well, Trevose, iii. 175. Productive, but dangerous to
    shipping, Harlyn, Peter family, the parish modern 176. Saint,
    festival, his death, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation, land tax, donation of Mrs. Tregoweth 177. Tonkin adds
    nothing but a notice of the saint’s name. By the Editor, no Saint
    Merina, Harlyn, Perthcothen ibid. Manor of Trevose, church,
    Catacluse stone, ornamented fonts of it here, at Padstow, and in St.
    Constantine’s church, description of St. Constantine’s, font and
    pillars handsomely carved 178. Catacluse cliffs and a pier, feast of
    Constantine, and of St. Merryn, impropriation of tithes, the three
    Mr. Gurneys, hurling, account of it in Carew, statistics, incumbent,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 179. Trevose head 180
  Merrifield, i. 134
  Merrin, or Merryn, St. church, iii. 178. The living held by the name
    of Gurney above a century 179
  ―――― parish, iii. 277
  Merryan, St. i. 404
  Merther, i. 113. Situation and possessor 44
  ―――― or Merthyr manor, i. 241 _bis_
  ―――― parish, i. 242, 417――ii. 2――iii. 207, 209, 210, 214, 354
  Merthyn, in Kerrier, iii. 133
  Merthyr church, iii. 182
  MERTHYR parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, saint,
    his well and chapel, etymology of Eglos-Merthyr, daughter to Probus,
    mode of nomination to the benefice, iii. 180. Contests respecting
    it, deed of agreement 181. Variation in value, ancient name,
    consolidation with Probus, endowment, incumbent, land tax,
    Tresawsan, James Hals 182. His history, Governor of Montserrat,
    recalled by the King, gained over to the rebels, made prisoner at
    the siege of Plymouth, and committed to Lidford castle 183. His life
    spared, comparison of Sir Richard Grenville with Richard 3rd, James
    1st, and Caligula, Hals detained at Lidford, and released by the
    arrival of Essex, Dr. Brown’s verses on Lidford castle 184. Custom
    of executing criminals before trial in Germany, Switzerland, and
    Carinthia, Hals’s family 186. Trewortha Vean and its possessors 188.
    By Tonkin, a daughter church to Probus ibid. Cornelly held with it,
    incumbent, manor of Fentongallen 189. Editor, Trevilian bridge, its
    situation, new road from Bodmin to Truro, Earl of Falmouth’s new
    road to Tregothnan, fairs, surrender of Lord Hopton’s army, church
    small, wooden tower, statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase 190
  Merton college, Oxford, iv. 86
  ―――― convent, i. 300
  Mervyn, St. parish, iii. 282
  Merwyn, Sir Edmund, iii. 206
  Meuthion, i. 11
  Mevagissey parish, iii. 194, 319
  MEVAGISSEY parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, name,
    saints, ancient name and its etymology, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation, land tax, original name, iii. 190. Penwarne
    Trelevan 191. By Tonkin, church, tower, bells sold by the rebels
    ibid. Editor, Tonkin’s details omitted, Lysons’s additions, lately
    a poor fishing village, pier, convenient for the pilchard fishery,
    number of houses, Porthilly, manor of Trelevan and of Penwarne,
    capacity of the pool, Porthmellin cove, account of the manor and
    barton of Trelevan 192. Manors of Petuan and Penwarne 193. Barton
    of Trewincy, disposal of the tithes, a station for fishing with
    the seine nets, nature of the bay, fish tithed, vicarage house,
    glebe improved, singularities of Dr. Lyne, statistics 194.
    Incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 195
  Mevaguisey, ii. 105
  Mevassary, i. 419
  Mevennus abbey, i. 98
  Mewan, i. 41
  ―――― St. Beacon, iii. 401
  ―――― parish, i. 251, 413――iii. 190, 401, 448, 450, 455. Mr. Borlase
    rector of 54
  MEWAN, ST. parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation, boundaries,
    ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax,
    Polgoth mine, iii. 195. Lefisick 196. Tonkin, patronage, incumbents,
    manor of Trewoone ibid. Editor, Hals’s various etymologies, pleasing
    appearance of the church, road from Truro to St. Austell improving
    ibid. Polgoth mine, increased working of mines, manor and village of
    Burngullo, manor of Trewoon, statistics 197. Rector, and Geology by
    Dr. Boase 198
  Mewla, i. 11
  Michael, St. Abbot of Glastonbury, iv. 26
  ―――― St. the Archangel, ii. 172, 174, 283――iii. 198, 200, 208,
    222.――Painted with wings, ii. 206. Vision of him 206, 208
  ―――― St. bells christened after, iii. 210. Churches dedicated to
    240, 398
  ―――― St. chapel at Rame Head, iii. 375
  ―――― St. Carhayes church, iii. 450
  ―――― St. Carhayes parish, i. 310, 413.――Or Carhays, iv. 117
  MICHAEL, ST. CARHAYES parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name, endowment, dedication, impropriation,
    patron, incumbent, iii. 198. Value of benefice, land tax, Trevanion
    and family 199. Tonkin, name, manor of Carhayes, Trevanion family
    200. Description of the house 201. Trevanion, house and park, Porown
    Berry, Hurris, Treberrick, church, situation, description 202.
    Tower, tablet to Mr. Hooker 203. Editor, motives of the civil wars,
    part taken in those of York and Lancaster by the families of
    Edgecumbe, Trevanion and Bodrigan ibid. The two first on the winning
    side, division of Bodrigan’s property, the Trevanions unsuccessful
    on behalf of Charles, and compounded for their state, letter from
    Mr. John Trevanion to Mr. Henry Davis 204. Trevanion’s issue 205.
    Parishes of Rogate and Selburne in Sussex, Arun river and dale,
    manor of Fyning, parish church, etymology 206. Consolidated with St.
    Stephen and St. Dennis, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 207
  ―――― St. de Lammana island, iv. 26 _bis_
  ―――― St. de Loo island, iv. 238
  ―――― St. Penkivell church, Fentongollan aisle in, iii. 187
  ―――― St. Penkivell manor, iii. 189
  ―――― St. Penkivell parish, i. 140, 141, 215――ii. 356――iii. 180, 354,
    464.――School at, ii. 32
  MICHAEL, ST. PENKIVELL parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation,
    boundaries, antiquity, iii. 207. Dedication, value, patron,
    incumbent, land-tax, endowment, Fentongollan aisle and chantry
    208. Fentongollan, its buildings, remembered by the writer, marble
    tomb-stone, the church a quarter cathedral 209. Bells baptized,
    form of the ceremony 210. Tonkin, hundred and situation, should
    have been named Fentongollan ibid. Fentongollan manor, its
    possessors 211. Once magnificent house now pulled down, Mopas
    Ferry, oysters spoiled by the copper ore, Treganyan, church tower,
    rectory house, Tregothnan 212. Boscawen family 213. Editor, Hals’s
    history diffuse ibid. That of Lysons substituted, Lysons, manor of
    Penkivell and of Fentongollan, hospitality of John Carminow 214.
    Tregothnan, Nancarrow ibid. Editor, Boscawen family, their origin
    215. Took the liberal side in the rebellion and revolution 216.
    Hugh Boscawen arrested Sir Richard Vyvyan, Mr. Basset and others
    on the accession of George 1st, feuds occasioned by that step,
    Boscawen ennobled, imbecility and marriage of the 2nd Lord
    Falmouth 217. Admiral Boscawen, the Nelson of his time, his
    popularity in the navy 218. His marriage and issue, memoir of Dr.
    Walcot 219. His lines on the death of W. G. Boscawen 220.
    Situation and advantages of Tregothnan, old house of great
    antiquity, beauty and convenience of the new one, old church and
    massive tower, statistics, incumbent 221. Geology by Dr. Boase 222
  Michael, St. rectory, i. 72
  ――――’s hold, iii. 298
  ――――’s, St. borough, Mr. Hussey, M.P. for, ii. 34
  ――――’s, St. chair, ii. 175 _bis_, 200, 205, 207
  ――――’s, St. chapel, ii. 201
  ――――’s, St. mount, i. 88 _bis_, 261――ii. 80, 169, 170――iii. 274,
    287, 298, 311――iv. 147, 165. By Leland 287. Its history. (_See St.
    Hilary parish_).――Cornish name for, ii. 200.――Abbot of, ii. 136,
    169, 170
  ――――’s St. Mount’s bay, iii. 81 _bis_, 82
  ――――’s St. Mount island, iv. 238
  ――――’s St. Mount monastery upon, iii. 136.――Priory of, ii. 208.
    Dissolved 191. Its property 208.――Priors of, i. 261――ii. 127, 209
    iii. 124, 128――iv. 164, 165
  ――――’s St. Mount in Normandy, ii. 176; and abbey in Periculo Maris
    208 _bis_, 210
  ――――’s St. shrine, ii. 215
  ――――’s St. well, iii. 211
  Michaelstow beacon, ii. 405
  ―――― Mary, and family, iii. 222
  ―――― parish, i. 1――ii. 401――iv. 42, 44, 93, 95
  MICHAELSTOW parish, Hals, a rectory, situation, boundaries, name,
    ancient name, value of benefice, land-tax, Michaelstow family, iii.
    222. Tonkin, name, patron, incumbent ibid. Editor, Helston in Trig
    manor, Helsbury park, ruins of an ancient castle, monuments in the
    church, Treveighan village, Trevenin, advowson, present rector,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 223
  Michel manor, i. 389. Account of 392
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 262
  Michell borough, i. 391――iv. 20.――Account of 388. Members for 389.
    Compact for elections 391. Last election 391. F. Scobell, M.P. for
    410. Illustrious representatives 390.――Humphrey Courtenay, M.P. for,
    ii. 385
  ―――― Christopher, iii. 319. Paul 382. Richard 387.――John, iv. 77.
    Matthew 98 _bis_. His widow 98. Robert 55. Samuel 98. Mr. 74
  ―――― of Harlyn, Miss, iii. 176. Heiress and family 177
  ―――― foundation, Queen’s college, Oxford, ii. 139
  ―――― or Mitchell parish, ii. 280. An adjective 171
  Middle ages, ii. 215
  ―――― Amble, ii. 336
  Middleham church, iii. 114
  Middlesex county, ii. 147
  Middleton church, i. 248
  Midhope, Rev. Stephen, of St. Martin’s, near Looe, turned
    anabaptist, iii. 123
  Midhurst, Sussex, iii. 206
  Midinnia, St. iii. 442
  Midmain rock, iv. 28
  Midshipmen subjected to ten years’ service, iii. 218
  Midwinter, Robert, ii. 196
  Milbrok, by Leland, iv. 282
  Mileton of Pengersick, Miss, iv. 22
  Milford haven, ii. 182
  Militon, ii. 169. Job 193
  ―――― of Pengerwick, i. 136
  Millaton manor, iii. 44
  Millett, i. 268. John 365.――Grace, Humphrey and Mary, ii. 218. Rev.
    Mr. 282. Family monuments 219.――Rev. John Curnow and Robert Oke,
    iii. 343
  ―――― of Gurlin, St. Erth, William, ii. 224
  Millington of Pengersick in Breage, ii. 212
  Millinike, account of, ii. 67
  Millinoweth, iii. 319
  Milliton, i. 124. Story of Mr. 125. Job and William ibid. Arms ibid.
  Mills, Rev. Mr. of Veryan, iv. 122
  ―――― of Exeter, Miss, iii. 162
  Milor church, iii. 59. Churchyard, Milorus buried in 59
  ―――― parish, ii. 2, 92, 337――iii. 305. _See Mylor_
  ―――― river, iii. 231
  ――――’s, St. by Leland, iv. 271
  Milorus, a Cornish prince, iii. 59
  Milton, John, i. 310
  Miners, lines upon, ii. 131
  ―――― militia, ii. 85
  Minerva, i. 295
  Mingoose, i. 12
  Minheneth, by Leland, iv. 281
  Minors of St. Enedor, Anne and Henry, i. 211
  Minster church, iii. 111
  ―――― parish, ii. 48, 49 _quat._――iii. 22, 39, 112――iv. 66, 68
  MINSTER parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, iii. 232. Editor, ruins of a monastery,
    Tanner calls it an alien priory ibid. Dugdale’s additions, manor of
    Pollifont an appendage to the living, profits of the manor,
    situation of the church, monuments, epitaph 233. No church tower,
    legend of the bells, Botreaux castle and honour 234. Cotton and
    Phillipps family, attempt on the life of George 3rd, site of
    Botreaux castle, the great house, port of Botreaux castle,
    exportation of slate, and importation of coal and lime 235.
    Capabilities of the place for an extensive commerce, patrons of the
    living, late incumbent, manor of Worthy vale, inscribed stone
    marking the site of King Arthur’s death wound, statistics, present
    rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 236
  ―――― priory, iii. 39――iv. 105.――Prior of, ii. 49
  ―――― in Kerrier, iii. 111 _bis_.――An alien priory, iv. 101. Prior of 168
  ―――― in Tolcarne, an alien priory, iv. 101
  Minver, St. Church, i. 74.――Spire, latitude and longitude of, iii. 281
  ―――― or Minvor, St. parish, i. 367, 382――ii. 67, 332.――Rev. William
    Sandys, vicar of, iii. 10
  MINVER, ST. or St. Mynfer parish, Hals, a vicarage, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    land-tax, Trevillva barton, iii. 237. MS. here deficient. Tonkin
    only repeats part of Hals. Editor, former impropriation, value of
    benefice, manor of Bodmin bestowed on Sternhold for his version of
    the Psalms, Mr. Sandy’s 238. Travelled with Lord de Dunstanville,
    called the Cardinal, monument to Mrs. Sandys, manor of Penmear,
    Trevernon 239. Monument to Thomas Darell, Pentire point, Trevelver,
    dangerous estuary, bridge over it, two district chapels, highlands
    and lowlands, sale of the bells 240. Though inscribed Alfredus Rex,
    lines on bells, especially Great Tom of Oxford, statistics, present
    vicar and patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 241
  Miracle of transporting St. Catherine’s body, ii. 3. Of the
    thundering legion 76
  Misall Romanorum, i. 393
  Mitchel of Hengar, i. 131
  Mitchell borough, i. 61――iii. 81, 322, 324. Description of 268.
    Constitution 271
  ―――― Robert, ii. 96. Rev. Mr. 299, 302, 315.――Rev. Mr. of Maker,
    iii. 101. Rev. Mr. of Merthyr 190. Rev. Mr. of St. Mewan
    195.――James, John, and Thomas, brothers, iv. 73. Captain 94
  ―――― of Truro, i. 398 _bis_
  ―――― Humphrey Borlase, Lord, iii. 268
  ―――― Morton manor, ii. 416
  Mithian manor, i. 7――ii. 192. Free chapel in 12
  Moddern, ii. 286
  Moderet, John, i. 283
  Modeton, iii. 438
  Modford in Launceston, iii. 136
  Modishole manor, iii. 269
  Mogul’s country, ii. 227
  Mogun bridge, by Leland, and trajectus, iv. 269
  Mogun’s, St. church, iii. 332
  ―――― creek, iii. 332
  Mohammed, the Sultan, interfered in the contest of the Paleolagi,
    took Constantinople, &c. ii. 367. Puts an envoy in irons 368
  Mohun, i. 63, 302. John 65, 255. Reginald 65, 255, 301, 356 Sir
    Reginald 7, 65 _bis_, 345, 346 _quat._ 356. Sibella 8. William 7,
    301. Arms 351, 356. Pedigree from the Conquest 66.――John de, ii.
    409 _bis_. Sir John 410. Sir John or Sir Reginald, story of 402.
    Reginald 56, 409 _bis_. Sir Reginald 410. Family 409, 410 _bis_,
    412. Monuments 411.――Reginald de, iii. 293, 303. Family 303.――Sir
    William, iv. 15. Family 44. Arms 96.――Lord, i. 65――ii. 410――iii.
    315――iv. 14, 186.――Charles Lord, i. 65. His duel with the Duke of
    Hamilton 66 and 67. His character 67. Wife drowned ibid.――John,
    Lord 65, 255.――John, Lord, of Dunster castle, Somersetshire, ii.
    409 _bis_.――Warwick, Lord, i. 65――ii. 410
  Mohun of Hall, Sir William, ii. 56
  ―――― of Lithony, i. 420. Warwick, ib.
  ―――― of Tencreek, i. 255. Warwick, William, and arms 255
  ―――― of Trewinard, i. 356 _bis_
  Mola, ancient chapel at, i. 12
  Molesworth, i. 61 _bis_, 74, 266 _bis_, 397. Hon. John 368. Sir John
    399. Sir William 117. Rev. William 117, 406.――Rev. H. ii. 364. Sir
    John 273. Sir W. 88. Family 151, 273, 356, 357.――Hender, iii. 214.
    John 234. Sir William 335. Family 334.――Sir John, iv. 64. Rev. W. of
    St. Winnow 159 _bis_. Family 44, 65, 127
  ―――― of Molesworth, Sir Walter, a crusader, i. 369, 375
  ―――― of Pencarrow, i. 416. Hender 370 _bis_. Sir Hender 370 _bis_,
    375. John 370 _ter._, 375, 397. Sir John 116, 370, 374, 375. Arms
    370.――Family, ii. 274, 334――iii. 170――iv. 163
  ―――― of Pendavy, Sir William, i. 377
  ―――― of Tretane, John, i. 369, 370
  Molton, ii. 76
  Mona, i. 194
  Monasticon Anglicanum, i. 168――ii. 62, 176――iii. 103, 111――iv. 6,
    100, 156
  Monck, Mr. of Devon, ii. 251.――General, his conduct characterized,
    iii. 460
  ―――― of Potheridge, Devon, Humphrey, ii. 251
  ―――― frigate, iii. 186
  Monckton, Henry de, i. 383.――Family, ii. 354
  ―――― Arundell, Robert, Viscount Galway, ii. 354
  Monheere, George, iii. 387
  Monk, General, i. 116――ii. 26――iv. 75 _bis_.――His refusal to give or
    take quarter, and victory over the Dutch, entertained by Capt.
    Penrose, ii. 26. Again defeats the Dutch 27. Sir John Grenville, the
    bearer of the King’s letters to 345. Rev. Nicholas, brother of the
    general 345.――Family, i. 36, 302――ii. 5
  ―――― frigate, ii. 28. Discharged unpaid 29
  Monks of St Benedict, i. 73; or Benedictine, ii. 208
  Monmouth, Jeffery of, Bishop of St. Asaph, i. 342
  ―――― Duke of, his invasion, iii. 160
  Monotholites, ii. 125
  Monpesson, Sir Giles, i. 223
  Montacute, William, Earl of Salisbury, i. 339.――Earl, ii. 91.
    Marquis 182
  ―――― priory in Somersetshire, iii. 261 _bis_――iv. 112 _ter._, 113
    _bis_, 122. Monks of 112
  Montagu, Lady Anne and Edward, Earl of Sandwich, iii. 104
  Montague, M. A. Browne, of Cowdray castle, Sussex, Lord, iii. 231
  Montgomery, Arnold de, i. 34.――Roger de, Earl of Arundell, iii. 142
  ―――― iv. 8
  Monton, David de, i. 246
  Montpelier, iii. 400
  Montreuil, ii. 127. In France, siege of 196
  Moone, Thomas, iii. 346
  Moor, Mr. i. 254
  Moore, Sir Thomas, ii. 53
  Moorman, Dr. John, Vicar of Menheniot, iii. 170
  Moorwinstow parish, iv. 16
  Mopas passage, iii. 212
  Moran, St. iv. 277
  Morden, by Leland, iv. 270
  Mordred, cousin of King Arthur, i. 337, 372.――His battle with
    Arthur, ii. 402. Mortally wounded 403
  Morea, ii. 366 _bis_, 367. Attacked by the Turks 367. Despots of 367
    _bis_
  Morehead family, property sold, iii. 20
  Moreland in Lesnewith, iii. 133
  Moreps, ii. 121
  Moreri, i. 111.――His Dictionnaire Historique, ii. 207――iv. 157
  Mores manor, i. 202, 203, 204
  Moresk manor, iii. 354
  MOREWINSTOW parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name
    and saint, a vicarage, value of benefice, patron, impropriation,
    iii. 254. Editor, later value and impropriation, present
    impropriation, rise of the river Tamar, west part rugged, situation
    and size of church ibid. Monuments, villages, Stanbury manor, error
    of Lysons, Stanbury, Bishop of Hereford, Tonacombe Lea farm 255.
    Cleave house, Chapel house, statistics, late vicar, Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Dunstone rocks, cliffs of Stanbury creek 256
  Morgan, Rev. W. A. of Lewannick, iii. 38.――Of Tresmere, iv. 65
  Morice, Barbara and Sir William, i. 116.――Family, ii. 256. Sir
    Nicholas 175. Sir William, family and property 334
  ―――― of Werrington, Catherine, i. 265, 266. Sir Nicholas and Sir
    William 265.――Family, iii. 178.――Edward, iv. 94
  ―――― St. Oratory of, ii. 75
  Morike church, iii. 190
  Moris manor, i. 396――ii. 2.――Duchy manor, iv. 72
  Morisk castle, iv. 228
  Morrice, i. 74
  Morris, Sir William and his family, iii. 460. Rev. Mr. 97. Mr.
    executed 184
  ―――― town, i. 266
  Morrison, Rev. F. H. ii. 416
  Morsa parish, ii. 282
  Morshead, Rev. Edward, i. 159.――William, ii. 154. Mr. 87. Family,
    iii. 172――iv. 60
  ―――― of Cartuther, Sir John, i. 321
  Mortaigne or Morton, Earl of, ii. 208, 358, 399. His market 70.
    Robert 175, 176, 202, 203 _bis_, 211, 235, 238, 379, 384, 422. His
    charter to St. Michael’s mount 210. William, Earl of, said to have
    built Lanceston castle, and to have drawn the inhabitants from
    Dunhevet to that town 418
  Mortayne, iii. 438
  Morth, John and William, iv. 22
  Mortimer, Eleanor, i. 64. Roger 339. Roger, Earl of March and Ulster 64
  Morton, iii. 14, 65――iv. 22
  ―――― Earl of, i. 134――iii. 261, 264, 276. John 296. Robert 112, 203
    _bis_, 418, 419. William 203 _ter._――Robert, iii. 14, 27, 44, 46,
    117, 291, 346, 349, 352, 451 _bis_. Robert Guelam 462.――Robert, iv.
    15, 67. William 110, 122.――Matilda, Countess of, ii. 211
  ―――― Earl of Cornwall and, iii. 22
  ―――― and Cornwall, Earl of, William, ii. 175.――Robert, iv. 102, 118,
    153. William 100
  ―――― Thomas, mayor of Launceston, ii. 423.――John, iv. 2, 3. Family
    and arms 3
  ―――― honor, iv. 96, 112
  ―――― manor, ii. 235――iv. 68
  ―――― prior of, ii. 49
  Morun, St. unknown, ii. 356
  Morva or Morvah, parish, iii. 82, 89, 425 _bis_――iv. 164
  MORVA parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, daughter to
    Madderne, etymology, Tregamynyon, iii. 242. The Golden Lanyon, his
    improvement in roofing houses, Carvolghe manor 243. Editor, church
    re-built, its situation, patron, curious entrenchment 243.
    Described, called Castle Chiowne, destroyed by depredations, a
    Cromleigh, Carn Galva, statistics 244. Geology by Dr. Boase 245
  Morval manor, iii. 246, 248, 361. House 249
  ―――― parish, iii. 427, 463. By Looe 118
  MORVAL parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, ancient
    name, a vicarage, value, etymology, iii. 245. Editor, Tonkin’s
    etymology mistaken, Sir Hugh de Morville one of Becket’s
    murderers, state of Cornwall during the wars of the roses, murder
    and robbery of John Glynn 246. His widow’s petition to parliament,
    schedule of property stolen 247. Buller family 248. Morval manor
    house, improved 249. Bray, epitaph on Philip Mayow, Dr. John Mayow
    250. Dr. Beddoes, Sir Humphrey Davy introduced to him by the
    Editor, Wood’s memoir of Dr. Mayow 251. His works, Polgover,
    Lydcott, Wringworthy, Sand Place village, situation of church,
    monuments 252. Impropriation of tithes, patron, incumbent, Bindon
    hill, prospect from it, road passes nearly over its summit,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 253
  Morval town, iii. 247
  Morvall, i. 316――ii. 59
  Morville, Sir Hugh de, iii. 246
  Morwell, by Leland, iv. 282
  Morwen, St. iii. 116, 254
  Morwenna, i. 2
  Morwinstow, ii. 340
  Morysk castle, iv. 229
  Moses, ii. 65
  Motiled, ii. 427
  Moune, William, i. 65 _bis_
  Mount of the tomb, ii. 208
  Mount or Mount’s bay, i. 227――ii. 118, 120, 169, 174, 176, 182, 207.
    Trees found in 173――iii. 46, 48, 78, 83, 97, 98, 215, 283, 375. _See
    St. Michael’s, Mount’s Bay_
  ―――― Calvary, a Cornish poem, i. 109――ii. 99 _bis_, 152. Extract
    from 99; and Keigwyn’s translation of, iii. 288. Both published by
    Editor 329
  ―――― Charles, i. 368
  ―――― Edgecumbe, iii. 108, 110. Account of 107. Partly in Devon 104.
    Described by Carew ibid. Possessors of 101. House built 103. The
    only seat in Cornwall superior to Tregothnan 221
  ―――― Edgecumbe, cliff at, iii. 380
  ―――― Edgecumbe, Countess of, ii. 364.――Earl of, iii. 29, 195,
    379――iv. 92.――Lord, i. 154――ii. 100, 393
  ―――― Seyntaubyn, i. 262
  ―――― Sinai, monastery upon, ii. 37
  ―――― Stephens, John, his life and tragical death, and speculations
    upon the latter, i. 84
  ―――― Toby, i. 158
  Mountague hill, Somersetshire, ii. 283
  Mounts, i. 84
  Mountserat island, iii. 183
  Mourton, James, ii. 193
  Mousehole manor, iii. 91
  ―――― village, iii. 286, 288, 290, 291. Account of 286. Destroyed by
    the Spaniards 91
  Moushole, ii. 174
  Mowne, William, i. 66 _bis_. Reginald, Lord Dunster 66. William,
    Lord Dunster 66. William, Earl of Somerset 66 _bis_
  Mowpass passage, iii. 464
  Mowsehole, by Leland, iv. 286
  Moyes, J. R. ii. 160 _bis_
  Moyle, i. 44, 45, 74. Ann and David 260. Nathaniel 371.――Family, ii.
    67. Thomas 67. Miss 77, 255. Mr. 77 _quin._, 78, 350
  Moyle of Bake, i. 222. Sir Walter 375.――Walter, ii. 76, 77. His
    works 76.――Sir Walter and his daughter, iii. 2
  ―――― of Beke, John, Sir Walter, and arms, ii. 67
  ―――― of Bodmin, ii. 67
  ―――― of Boke, Elizabeth and Sir Walter, i. 243, 244
  ―――― of Moyle, ii. 67
  ―――― of Oxford, ii. 67
  ―――― of Pendavy, i. 375. Nathaniel ibid.
  ――――of Trefurans, ii. 67
  Moyn, Reginald, Earl of Somerset, i. 66
  Mudgan, iii. 126. Account of 125
  Mudge, Colonel, iv. 31
  Mullion cove, iii. 259
  ―――― parish, i. 301; or Mullyan, ii. 116, 126――iii. 128, 416, 419,
    424. In Kerrier 164
  MULLION parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name,
    dedication, a vicarage, patron, incumbent, impropriation, endowment,
    value, the saint, iii. 257. Editor, church ancient, painted glass
    ibid. Monument and epitaph to Mr. Favell, tower, tithes, manor of
    Pradannock, divided into higher and lower, Clahar manor, parish
    feast, St. Malo’s day, late vicar, statistics 258. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Kinance cove, Mullion cove, Bolerium cove. Editor, beauty of
    Kinance cove, description of it and of the Cornish rocks generally
    259. Erica vagans and asparagus officinalis 260
  Mundy, i. 232 _ter._ John, _bis_, Sir John and arms 232
  ―――― of Rialton, Anne and John, iii. 186
  Mundye, Anthony, ii. 10
  Murray, Mr. of Albemarle-street, iii. 251
  Murth, Jeffrey and John, iv. 25. Mr. 24. Family ibid. Arms 25
  Musgrave, Dr. W. letters to, ii. 76
  Musical air, ancient, found in Scotland, Ireland, and Cornwall,
    supposed to be British, ii. 166
  Muttenham, etymology and resident, i. 104
  Mydhop of Essex, Henry, Roger and arms, i. 320
  Mylbrooke, iv. 291
  Mylor manor, iii. 228 _bis_
  ―――― parish, ii. 11
  MYLOR parish, Hals lost, situation, boundaries, saint, value of
    benefice, a vicarage, patron, incumbent, impropriation, Carclew
    barton and its possessors, iii. 224. House built by Mr. Kempe, tin
    225; and antimony, Restronget manor, and passage with a ferry boat,
    part of Penryn manor, Trefusis and Tregoze manors 226. Trefusis
    family, house, &c. Nankersy, its etymology, town of Flushing, the
    Dutch would have made it commercial, Mr. Trefusis improved it at
    great expense 227. Better situated for packets than Falmouth, Mylor
    manor, situation and description of the church 228. Editor, error in
    the valuation, monuments in the church 228. Westmacott’s to Reginald
    Cocks, Carclew, the Lemon family, Polvellan described 229. Colonel
    Lemon a proficient in music, Sir William improved Carclew, Sir
    Charles’s further improvements, erica ciliaris, Trefusis family 230.
    Situation of Trefusis, Flushing an elegant town. Tonkin’s etymology
    of Restrongel, present vicar, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 231
  ―――― pool, iii. 224, 228
  Mynor, Anne and Henry, i. 222
  Mynors of St. Enedor, Anne and Henry, iii. 135
  ―――― of Treago, i. 248. Anne 249
  Myra, in Lysia, St. Nicholas, Archbishop of, iv. 172

  Naal or Natal Abbot, iii. 432
  Naboth’s vineyard, i. 329
  Nacothan, John, iii. 387
  Nampara, iii. 326, 327
  Nampetha, iii. 319
  Nancar, account of, i. 256
  Nancarrow estate, i. 19――iii. 215
  ―――― family, i. 20
  Nance in Illogan, iv. 129
  ―――― i. 298.――Family and arms, ii. 239.――John, iv. 129, 130. Arms 129
  ―――― of Chester family, iii. 382
  ―――― of Nance, ii. 337
  ―――― Mellin, iii. 326
  Nanceolvern, possessors of, iii. 88
  Nanfan of Trethewoll, John, Richard and arms, i. 408
  Nanfon, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Nankersy, tenement, account of, iii. 227. A Dutch town on it ibid.
  Nankivell, Rev. Edw. of St. Agnes and Stithians, iv. 5
  Nanquitty, ii. 57
  Nansant church, ii. 256
  Nansanton, Nassington or Naffeton, iii. 334, 335
  Nansaugh barton, account of, ii. 354
  Nansavallan, account of, by the Editor, ii. 305. By Hals 299. By
    Tonkin 303
  ―――― farm, improvement of, ii. 306
  Nanskevall or Typpel, of St. Colomb, Matthew, Richard and arms, iv. 139
  Nansloe, account of, ii. 139
  Nansoath manor, account of, ii. 353
  Nansperian, i. 349 _ter._ Arms 349
  Nanswhiddon, account of, i. 223
  Nanswidden in St. Colomb, ii. 143
  Nantellan, i. 257
  Nants, ii. 236. Account of 238
  Nantval, i. 413
  Napleton, Rev. John, ii. 33
  Napoleon’s use of the Pitt diamond, i. 69
  Narbonne, general chapter of, i. 81
  Nare, the, i. 330
  ―――― point, i. 330
  Nash, the architect, iii. 205
  Nation, Rev. Mr. ii. 332
  Natural history, the learned Dr. Lombard ignorant of, ii. 408
  Naunton’s, St. chapel and well, i. 257
  Nautical Almanack, description of, conducted by Dr. Maskelyne, since
    improved, ii. 233
  Nava family, ii. 80
  Naval affairs after the seven years war, ii. 246
  ―――― power, iii. 154
  Navarre, Blanche, Queen of, iii. 19
  Naw Voz or Naw Whoors, i. 220
  Nectan, i. 2――iv. 156
  ―――― St. or Nighton, iv. 155. His history 155
  ―――― chapel, iv. 157
  Nelson, Admiral Boscawen compared with, iii. 218
  Neocæsarea, i. 388
  Neot, St. iii. 261, 262.――His body stolen, i. 99.――His life, ii.
    396――iii. 262. A relation of Alfred, Alfred visited him, was
    advised by him in founding the university of Oxford, his
    remains 263
  Neot’s, St. church, iii. 20. Its windows 363.――Curious painting in,
    ii. 298
  ―――― manor, iii. 260, 261
  ―――― parish, i. 174, 178――ii. 395――iii. 111, 347――iv. 48, 128,
    129.――Alfred’s visit to, iii. 241
  NEOT’S, ST. parish, Hals’s, MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, a vicarage, value, patrons, incumbent, iii. 260.
    Manor of St. Neot 261. By Editor, error in Tonkin’s valuation,
    Lysons on the manors of this parish, manor and advowson united ibid.
    Mr. Grylls restored the church, its situation, St. Guerir, performed
    a miraculous cure on Alfred, St. Neot related to Alfred, his
    singular penance and miraculous powers, Alfred frequently visited
    him, his death 262. Appeared after death to Alfred, led his armies,
    and advised him to found Oxford university, his relics stolen, the
    monastery suppressed after the Conquest, his memory cherished,
    diminutive stature, painted glass preserved for his sake,
    description of the church 263. Windows, voluntary contributions,
    preserved through the Reformation and Civil War, since falling into
    decay till restored by Mr. Grylls, “Hedgeland’s Description, &c.”
    264. Dozmere, marvellous tales relating to it, story of Mr. Tregagle
    condemned to empty it with a limpet shell having a hole bored in it,
    his roaring 265. Etymology of Dozmere, statistics, incumbent,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 266
  ――――’s, St. an alien priory, iv. 101
  Neotston or Neot’s place, iii. 261
  Nero, the Roman emperor, i. 329――iv. 101
  Nesta, Princess of Wales, i. 34
  Nettlebed manor, iv. 4, 5 _bis_
  Nettlecombe, Somersetshire, iv. 114
  Neustria pillaged by the Normans, ii. 90
  Neville, Richard, Earl of Salisbury, and Margaret his daughter, ii.
    182. Richard Earl of Warwick 38. His cognizance on Fowey church 38.
    Grants the Foy men commissions for privateering 40. His commission
    to punish the Foy pirates 41
  Nevres, St. Dye, Bishop of, ii. 133
  New bridge, i. 138
  ―――― Cambridge, iii. 72
  ―――― Holland, captain Bligh, governor of, iv. 45
  ―――― York, ii. 268
  Newcastle, ii. 28
  ―――― Hollis, Duke of, iii. 147
  Newcome, i. 160
  Newcomen, Mr. of Dartmouth, ii. 83
  Newenham, Devon, Cistercian abbey at, iii. 293
  Newham abbey, Devon, its dissolution, iv. 15
  Newhaven, Charles Cheney, viscount, iii. 458
  Newlan, Newlin or Newlyn parish, ii. 174, 270――iii. 81, 97, 99, 112,
    313, 317, 324, 333, 358――iv. 20.――Vicarage, i. 130
  Newland parish, i. 230, 245, 386, 393
  NEWLIN, or ST. NEWLIN parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, saint, a vicarage, value, patron, tithe
    appropriation, incumbent, manor of Cargol, ruins and prison there,
    Treludra, iii. 267. Humphrey Borlase adhered to King James 2nd,
    Treludra or Borlase Pippin, borough of Mitchell, described by
    Browne Willis, manor 268. Degembris, Palmaunter, Tresilian,
    Treworthen manors 269. Trerice manor 270. By Editor, valuation,
    impropriation, situation and description of church, carved work,
    Arundell vault ibid. Monument to Mr. Pooley, incumbent Mr.
    Polwhele, manor of Cargols, and Treludra, borough of Michell, its
    constitution 271. Remarks upon it, close boroughs in general and
    the Reform Act, Shepherds, Sir C. Hawkins’s lead and silver mine
    272. Mr. John Giddy a memoir of him, his death, quotation from
    Juvenal 273. Manor of Newlyn, story of Sir John Arundell, John for
    the King and his son the first lord of Trerice, the house at
    Trerice, Tresilian improved, statistics 274. Present vicar,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, Trevemper bridge, Black Lime rock, the town
    a village in the parish of Paul 275
  Newlin, by Leland, iv. 265, 286
  Newlyn, James de, iii. 287
  ―――― manor, iii. 274
  ―――― town, iii. 275, 286. Account of 288, 289
  Newnham manor, ii. 318
  Newport borough, ii. 420, 432.――Its history and small extent, iii.
    458. Bought by the Duke of Northumberland 460. Charles Cheyney, M.P.
    for 458
  ―――― town, iii. 461――iv. 51
  Newquay, i. 236. Account of 234, 235
  Newton, Sir Isaac, iii. 174.――His theory of gravitation, &c. ii. 222
  ―――― account of, iii. 161
  ―――― Ferrers, West, iii. 164. Its possessors 165
  Nicene Creed, i. 252
  Nicholas, Mrs. of Looe, i. 286
  ―――― Pope, ii. 354, 356, 365, 384, 394, 398, 411, 412, 414――His
    taxatio Beneficiorum, iii. 5, 7, 41, 44, 46, 56, 106 _bis_, 172,
    228, 232, 238, 257, 261, 270, 276, 278, 291, 400, 453 _bis_――iv. 113
  ―――― 2nd, Pope, i. 110
  ―――― 4th, ―――― iv. 152
  ―――― 5th, ―――― iv. 148
  ―――― St. supposed by Tonkin to be the patron saint of Kellington
    parish, ii. 311. A popular saint, held in high veneration in Russia,
    his history, kept the Roman fasts when an infant 312. His festival
    celebrated by the boy bishop 313.――The patron of infants, iv. 172.
    Of mariners 171. His history 172
  ―――― St. church, Bodmin, belonging to Franciscan friars, great
    dimensions, converted into a house of correction and market place,
    i. 79, and court-house 80. Its font 80. Revenues 83
  ―――― island, iii. 101――iv. 238
  ―――― St. in Scilly, priory and prior, iv. 171
  ―――― Shambles, London, i. 83
  Nicholl of Penrose, Anthony, ii. 384
  Nicholls, i. 74, 305 _bis_――ii. 130.――Frank, M. D. iii. 84. Walter
    16. William 85 _bis_. Mrs. 85. Family 83, 84, 90
  ―――― of Penrose, ii. 153
  ―――― of Trewane, ii. 338. John 335, 339 _quat._ Arms 339
  Nichols, J. and Son, Parliament-street, ii. 295, 296――iii. 45, 120,
    264――iv. 25
  ―――― i. 109, 178, 221.――Family, iii. 243, 343
  ―――― of Trewane, i. 173, 416
  Nicholson, Margaret, i. 134――iv. 45
  Nicolas, Sir Harris, iii. 138
  Nicoll, Anthony, iv. 96. Humphrey 97
  Nietstone, iv. 48
  Nightingale, i. 144
  Nikenor, by Leland, iv. 265
  Nile, battle of, iii. 160
  Nine maids, i. 221. Account of 220.――In Gwendron, ii. 137
  Ninnis, ii. 218
  Niveton, i. 174
  “Noble ingratitude,” iv. 98
  Noles, Mrs. Elizabeth, ii. 84
  Norden, J. i. 341, 350――ii. 336, 414, 417――iii. 75, 360, 361――iv. 41
  Norfolk, iii. 248
  ―――― Thomas Howard, Duke of, iii. 293
  Norman Conquest, ii. 62, 80, 92, 94, 106, 126, 129, 151, 155, 165,
    258, 291, 299, 319, 335, 381――iii. 33, 56, 59, 74, 78, 114, 118, 130
    _bis_, 151, 168, 175, 207, 208, 209, 222, 264, 363, 391, 393, 402,
    403, 419, 425, 428, 436, 456――iv. 66, 71 _bis_, 99, 100, 140, 160, 164
  ―――― French, life of Guy Earl of Warwick in, iii. 113
  ―――― magnificence, ii. 423
  Normandy, i. 335 _quat._, 336――ii. 179 _bis_, 202――iv. 103, 144
  ―――― Duke of, iii. 130. Robert and William 462.――Rolle, ii. 344, 347
  Normans, i. 256――iv. 99
  ―――― petition for and obtain letters of marque against Fowey and
    burn it, ii. 39. Pillage Neustria 90. Their castles, the keeps
    spacious 423
  North, Lord, ii. 245. Lord Keeper 255 _bis_. Mr. Tregenna married
    his relation 255
  ―――― hill parish, ii. 230――iii. 37, 43
  Northampton, John, i. 341
  Northcott, i. 108, 111
  Northill, i. 21, 409
  Northmore of Oakhampton, Devon, Mr. iii. 41
  Northumberland, i. 289, 290 _ter._――iv. 42
  ―――― Hugh 1st Duke of, iii. 460 _bis_. Josceline Percy, Earl of 460
  ―――― Ethelfred, King of, ii. 284
  Norton manor, iv. 15
  Norton Rolle manor, ii. 416, 427
  Noseworthy, Edward, ii. 260――iii. 5, 238. William 83.――Francis, iv. 77
  Nosworthy, Edward, i. 36 _bis_. John 36.――Edward, ii. 51, 55 _ter._
    His lawsuit 51. Family 55 _bis_
  ―――― of Truro, Jane, i. 243
  Notitia Monastica, i. 200
  ―――― Parliamentaria, i. 200
  Nottingham, ii. 76
  ―――― castle, ii. 179
  Nowell, Mr. made a fortune at Falmouth, ii. 19.――Michael, of
    Falmouth, iii. 77
  Noy, i. 143 _bis_. Edward 147. Hesther and Humphrey 144. William 144
    _quat._ Attorney-general 147
  Noye, William, Attorney-general, ii. 66, 160. Bought the estate of
    Lanew, Colonel Humphrey his son dispossessed after an expensive
    litigation by the Earl of Bath 333. Sold his title to Davies 334.
    The Editor their descendant and heir at law 339
  ―――― of Pendrea, in Burian, Bridgman, iii. 145, 159, 160. Catherine
    152 _bis_, 159. Edward 145 _bis_, 152 _bis_, 153, 156. His duel 152,
    156. Humphrey 145. Colonel Humphrey 145, 152 _bis_, 153 _quat._,
    156, 159 _bis_, 160. His marriage contract 157. His monument 151.
    Katherine 145. William 145. William, Attorney-general 143, 145, 151,
    152, 161, 342. Memoir of him 143. L’Estrange’s character of him, his
    death, and descendants, entertaining Charles 1st 145. Upheld the
    extreme prerogative 146. Received the thanks of his college, having
    pleaded its cause gratis, with the report from the college register
    155. His picture, a copy presented by the Editor to Exeter college
    156. Anagram on his name 146. His will 152. His works 153. Catalogue
    of them 154. His MSS. in the British Museum 154. His “Reports”, 145,
    154. Family 216.――Arms, i. 361――iii. 145, 151. Crest and motto
    151.――Hester, widow of Humphrey, her petition, iv. 57. Colonel
    Humphrey served Charles 1st 58. William, Attorney-general 57 _bis_,
    58. Family 57
  Nugent, iii. 192.――George Lord, his life of Hampden, ii. 77. His
    account of the quarrel of Eliot and Moyle 78. His memorials of
    Hampden 349.――Lord 349
  Nunn, St. mother of St. David, iii. 292
  Nunn’s, St. pool, method of cure, i. 21
  Nunne, St., day dedicated to, i. 25
  Nuns, Benedictine, i. 73
  Nutcell, St. Boniface, Abbot of, iv. 128
  Nutcombe, Rev. Nutcombe, Chancellor of Exeter, iii. 4
  Nutwell, i. 168, 169
  Nympha bank, iii. 6

  Oak bark, decoction of, preserves fishing nets, ii. 264
  Oakeston, Sir Alexander, ii. 8, 109――iii. 448.――Joan, his widow, ii. 109
  Oakhampton, i. 170. Borough 65
  Oakstone, Sir Alexander, i. 36
  Oate of Peransabulo, i. 348
  Oats, John, iii. 318 _bis_. Thomas 318 _quat._ Mr. and origin of
    name 318
  Observatory, Royal, Mr. Hitchins and his son assistants at, ii. 222, 224
  Ocrinum, ii. 94, 199. Of Ptolemy 174. Promontory supposed to be the
    Lizard 20
  Octa, i. 326
  Octanett family, ii. 341
  Odin, i. 341
  Odo, Mr. ii. 426
  Œdipus Tyrannus, ii. 103
  Ogbere or Ugbere tenement, iv. 41
  Okeford, Devon, Mr. Haden, incumbent of, iii. 19. Rev. James Parkin,
    rector 96
  Oklynton Brygge, iv. 255
  Olea fragrans, iv. 183
  Oliver, Thomas, ii. 189.――Dr. iii. 88. Mr. of Falmouth 159.――Rev.
    Mr. of Zennar, iv. 164
  “Oliver’s Historic Collections,” iii. 372
  Oncomb, Rutland, ii. 89
  Opie, i. 368.――The artist, iii. 88
  ―――― of Ennis, i. 399 _bis_. John and Robert ibid.
  ―――― of Towton, i. 399. Arms ibid.
  Oppie, Thomas, iii. 387
  Orange, Prince of, ii. 112――iii. 216, 297
  Orcett, ii. 340
  Orchard, Charles, iii. 349. Family 415, 416. Paul 413, 414, 416
  ―――― of Alderscombe, ii. 347. Memorials in church 347
  ―――― of Hartland Abbey, Paul, ii. 347
  ―――― of Orcott family, and Charles, Sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 343
  ―――― Mauvais, East, manor, iv. 136
  Orcot, account of, ii. 343
  Ordgar, Duke of Devon, iv. 6.――Earl of Devonshire, iii. 384, 460
  Ordnance, Mr. Call’s improvements in, iv. 11
  Ordulf, Earl of Devonshire, iii. 385
  Orestes, iii. 265
  Orford, George Walpole, Earl of, iii. 230 _bis_
  Origen, i. 193, 388
  Orleans, Duke of, Regent of France, purchases the Pitt Diamond, i.
    68. Wears it in his hat 69
  Ornithologum longibracteatum, iv. 182
  Orosius, ii. 237
  Osbaldeston, Miss, ii. 34
  Osbert, i. 383.――Mr. iv. 44, 46
  Osborne family, iv. 173
  Osca, a town in Spain, i. 88
  Oseney Abbey, iii. 241
  Osmunda Regalis, iv. 181
  Osraig clan, iii. 331
  Osseney North, near Oxford, iv. 5
  Ossian, ii. 405. His poems 406
  Ossory, Bishop and Archdeacon of, iv. 146 _bis_
  ―――― county, ii. 94――iii. 331
  Ossuna, Don Diego, Bishop of, i. 311
  Oswald, St. iii. 33
  Otaheite, discovery of, i. 359――iii. 405
  Otham or Othram manor, iii. 276
  Other half stone, i. 178 _bis_, 180, 182 _bis_, 183
  Othonna pectinata, iv. 182
  Otterham parish, ii. 86 _bis_, 232, 273 _bis_――iii. 22――iv. 61, 125, 127
  OTTERHAM parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, iii. 275.
    Value, ancient name, a rectory, patron and incumbent 276. Editor,
    manor, church, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase ibid.
  Ottery St. Mary, i. 394
  Ottomans destroyed the wall of Constantinople, ii. 366
  Oughtred, Sir Anthony, defeats the French fleet, ii. 171
  Ovid, passage from, i. 189.――Notes on, iv. 87
  Owen, G. W., iv. 60, 276
  Oxalis, iv. 182
  Oxenham of Oxenham in Devon, iv. 25
  Oxford, i. 84, 247――ii. 60, 65, 138, 139, 221, 241, 389――iii. 52,
    160, 329――iv. 14.――Bath stone brought to, i. 58.――Arms of, and
    tradition connected with them, ii. 404
  ―――― near Sevenoaks, iv. 87
  ―――― county, iii. 156
  ―――― Earl of, John de Vere, i. 262, 402. Richard de Vere 262,
    263.――Aubrey last of the De Veres, ii. 395. John 12th Earl 181
    _bis_. John 13th Earl 182, 183 _bis_, 184. John 14th Earl 185.
    Richard 11th Earl 181. Richard 395.――Richard de Vere 11th Earl, iii. 65
  ―――― press, iii. 123.――Delegates from, ii. 266
  ―――― University, ii. 147, 233, 266――iii. 72, 155, 163, 221, 239, 300
    _bis_, 336 _bis_, 344, 352――iv. 69, 144, 145.――Founded, iii.
    264.――J.P. Rigaud, Professor of Astronomy at, ii. 376
  ―――― verses, ii. 348
  Oxnam, Richard, iii. 89
  Oysters poisoned by the copper, iii. 212

  Pabenham, John de, i. 370
  Pacific Ocean, coral reefs in, iii. 108
  Padestock, iii. 324
  Paddistow, by Leland, iv. 284
  Padestow, by Leland, iv. 260
  Padstow church, i. 74.――Font in, iii. 178
  ―――― harbour, ii. 253――iii. 236, 382, 423
  ―――― haven, i. 372, 373 _bis_, 376 _bis_, 381
  ―――― parish, i. 377――ii. 79, 256 _bis_, 299――iii. 175, 334 _bis_,
    435.――Rev. William Rawlings, rector, ii. 400.――Etymology, iii. 176
  PADSTOW parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, Leland’s
    account of the town, privileges derived from Athelstan, ancient
    names, value of benefice, St. Petroc born there, Fuller and
    Collier upon St. Petroc, church a vicarage, value, iii. 277.
    Patron, incumbent 278. Editor, named from St. Petroc, value of
    benefice, Whitaker’s conjecture that Mr. Prideaux lived on the
    site of St. Petroc’s monastery, character of him ibid. Carew’s
    account of the house, its erection and improvements, church 279.
    Prideaux monuments, town not large, harbour inconvenient,
    prospects of its improvement, Mr. William Rawlins brought a
    considerable trade, tithes split, several chapels, St. Sampson’s
    280. Account of St. Sampson, a beautiful walk, St. Saviour’s
    chapel, origin of that name, domestic tragedy contained in a black
    letter pamphlet, trigonometrical survey, Stepper point 281. Time
    of high water, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase, slate at
    Dinah’s Cave and Rock Ferry 282. Singular crystalline rock,
    Penniscen bay, Yealm bridge in Werrington 283
  ―――― rock, i. 74, 94
  ―――― town, iii. 331
  Pagan army employed by the Christian Emperor of Rome, ii. 75
  ―――― inhabitants of Cornwall converted, iii. 304
  Pagans, iii. 285
  Page, i. 263
  Paget, Rev. Mr. of St. Mewan, iii. 196.――Rev. Simon of Truro, iv. 76
  Pagett, Rev. Mr. of Truro, iv. 71
  Painter, i. 344――ii. 316
  ―――― of Antrim, i. 351
  ―――― of Trelisick, ii. 99
  Paldys tin mine, ii. 131
  Paleolagi of Montferrat, ii. 369 _bis_
  Paleolagus dynasty, account of, ii. 366. Andronicus 1st and 2nd,
    John 1st and 2nd, quarrels of Theodore, Constantine, Demetrius, and
    Thomas, death of John 2nd, death of Andronicus, Demetrius possessed
    Silybria and aspired to the throne 366. Thomas supported
    Constantine, dissensions of Demetrius and Thomas, Mohammed’s
    advantages therefrom, death of Constantine 367. Thomas retires on
    the taking of Constantinople, Demetrius submits, his death and
    account of his two sons, Thomas’s pension from the pope, Gibbon’s
    contemptuous account of the family fate 368. Refuted 369
  Paleolagus, Andrew, son of Demetrius, ii. 368. Andronicus 366.
    Camilio 365. Camillo 369, 370 _bis_. Constantine 366 _bis_, 369.
    Eighth of that name, and last Emperor 365. Demetrius 366 _bis_.
    Dorothy 365. Daughter of Theodore 374. Her marriage and death 375.
    Emmanuel 366 _bis_. Ferdinando 365, 369. Son of Theodore 374. Lost
    sight of 375. Isidore, a monk 366. John 365 _bis_, 369, 370. Third
    son of Demetrius 369. John 2nd 370. Son of Theodore 374. Lost sight
    of 375. Manuel son of Demetrius 368. Maria 365. Daughter of Theodore
    374. Died unmarried 375. Martha, wife of Theodore, jun. 375. Michael
    366. Prosper 365, 369 _bis_. Theodore 365 _bis_, 366 _bis_, 369,
    375. His life by Mr. Arundell 365. Birth, parentage, reasons for
    leaving Italy 370. In England, and married in 1615, register of his
    marriage imperfect, his issue, did not settle at Landulph before
    1622 with his family 372. Connected with the Arundell or Lower
    family, probably lived at Clifton with Sir Nicholas Lower, his death
    373. Burial, discrepancy of dates, vault and coffin opened,
    appearance of the body 374. His monument, its inscription, arms 365.
    Account of his issue 374. Theodore son of Theodore 374. Died at sea
    375. Thomas 365, 366 _bis_, 369, 370. His character from
    Khalcondylas by Recaut, and by Mahomet 368.――Constantine, iv. 148
  Palestine, i. 130, 411――iii. 129.――Guy, Earl of Warwick’s journey
    to, iv. 113
  Palfer castle, Normandy, iv. 141
  Pallamaunter of Palamaunter family, iii. 269
  ―――― manor, iii. 269
  Pallamonter, i. 247
  Pallas, i. 183
  Pallephant, i. 159
  Palmer, Roger, Earl of Castlemaine, ii. 11. Rev. Mr. refused to
    subscribe the Act of Uniformity 220. His prophecy 221
  Palmerias, Matthias, iv. 148
  Pancras, St. Truro church dedicated to, iv. 8
  ―――― church, London, iii. 148
  ―――― street, Truro, iv. 76 _bis_, 80, 81
  Panicum dactylon, iv. 180
  Par, near St. Austell, ii. 18
  Paraguay, ii. 290
  Parc, i. 52
  Paris, iv. 145.――Council of, ii. 90. St. Sampson’s remains removed
    to 90
  ―――― Dr. i. 150, 151. William de 83.――Dr. instituted the Geological
    Society of Cornwall, iii. 95. His works 97. His life of Sir Humphrey
    Davy 95
  Parishes, number of in Cornwall, iv. 166
  Park, i. 367, 369. Account of 205
  Park of Park, i. 207
  ―――― Erisey, iii. 383
  Parke, by Leland, iv. 258
  Parker, i. 61 _ter._ Francis and Sir John 302. Sir Nicholas 125,
    136. Arms 136.――Rev. James, iii. 96
  ―――― of Burrington, Sir Nicholas, Governor of Pendennis castle, his
    arms and character, ii. 12. Death, and burial in Budock church 13
  ―――― of Rathow, arms, ii. 12, 130
  Parkinge family, iv. 138. Heir of 139
  Parkings, Francis, family and arms, iv. 140
  Parliament, memoirs of, ii. 277. Commons House of 38. Camelford
    sends members to 403, 404. Launceston sent two members to 432.
    Favoured Mr. Peters, iii. 73
  Parliament army injured Leskeard, iii. 26. Defeated 17
  ―――― Roll, ii. 170
  Parliament street, Westminster, ii. 295
  ―――― wars, iii. 73
  ―――― writ to Truro, iv. 74
  Parmenter, Mr. of Ilfracombe, iii. 343
  Parr, Queen Catherine, i. 16. Thomas 24
  Parsons, John, iii. 260
  Partridge, Cornish for, i. 243, 244, 245
  Pascentius, i. 326
  Pascoe, Captain, ii. 318. Rev. Mr. 329, 330.――Erasmus, iii. 343.
    Thomas 89. Family 83
  Pashley family, ii. 395
  Passiflora cærulea racemosa, iv. 182
  Passio Christi, an ancient MS. in Cornish, observations upon, App.
    5, iv. 190
  Patagonia, Admiral Byron wrecked on the coast of, iii. 205
  Patefond, William de, i. 246
  Paternus, St. i. 321.――His history, iii. 336
  Patras, a city of Achaia, ii. 367, 369
  Patrick, i. 295.――Mr. iv. 33 _bis_
  ―――― St. i. 250――iii. 331 _bis_, 431.――Cleared all Ireland at once
    of serpents, ii. 298. His meeting with St. German 65
  Patrick’s, St. church, Dublin, iv. 138, 147
  Patten, Miss, iii. 279
  Paul, the Apostle, iii. 284 _bis_.――St. i. 108, 122 _ter._, 198,
    206――ii. 53. His conversion 112
  ―――― Nicholas, iv. 77
  ―――― parish, ii. 174――iii. 78, 79, 84, 275. Church burnt by the
    Spaniards 91
  PAUL parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, iii. 283. St.
    Paulinus, Archbishop of York, memoir of, a vicarage, value of
    benefice, patron, impropriator, incumbent, earlier value 284.
    Editor, parish has not the prefix of St. ibid. Notice of St. Paul
    de Leon, parish feast, attached to Hailes abbey, dedication of
    that abbey by Richard, King of the Romans, relic presented to it
    by his son 285. Its value and history, church and monuments,
    Mousehole town 286. Destroyed by the Spaniards, the church burnt,
    register of the event, Spanish ball preserved, chapel at
    Mousehole, and on St. Clement’s island 287. Change of name from
    Porth Enys, Newlyn, Keigwin family, Godolphins at Treworveneth,
    Trungle 288. Chiowne and the Chinese wall, view from above Newlyn,
    new road, monument to commemorate the finding of a ring 289.
    Curious British ornaments, other similar ones, supposed to have
    been worn by the Druids, statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 290
  Paul pier, iv. 23
  ―――― St. de Leon, notice of, iii. 285.――Name explained, iv. 313
  Paul’s, St. cathedral, London, iii. 167
  ―――― St. church, Covent Garden, iii. 252
  Paulet, Sir John, ii. 363.――Henry, last Duke of Bolton, iii. 47.
    Family 47, 123
  Paulin parish, iii. 425
  Paulinus, Bishop of Rochester, and first Archbishop of York, iii.
    284 _bis_, 285. His history 284
  Paulet, ii. 292
  Pawley, Jane, account of, iii. 8. Family 8 _bis_.――Mr. iv. 74
  Pawton, ii. 362――iii. 175 _bis_
  Paxton, Richard, i. 283
  Payne, John, of St. Ives, ii. 192. John, mayor of St. Ives, his arms 198
  Paynter, i. 359, 360. Rev. C. H., 251. Francis 145, 148 _bis_. John
    348. William 145.――Rev. Thomas, ii. 142. Miss 300. Family 228,
    270.――Mr. iii. 441. Family 445
  ―――― of Boskenna, Francis, i. 359
  ―――― of St. Erth, i. 423
  ―――― of Trelisick, i. 145. Arthur 348, 350. Francis 349, 350 _bis_,
    351, 359. James 350, 359. Mary 359. William 350. Arms 349, 350
  Paynter’s Consultation, i. 148
  Payton, i. 405
  Peace and taxes, commissioners for, John Rame, iv. 129. John Robins 117
  Pearce, James, i. 112.――Family, iii. 60, 83.――Nicholas _ter._ iv. 3.
    Rev. Mr. of Tywardreth 109. Rev. Mr. of Broadoak 185
  Pearce of Penryn, Mr. and Miss, iii. 445
  Pears, John, iii. 6
  Pearse, Rev. Thomas, ii. 92.――Mr. and Miss, iii. 9
  ―――― of Helaton, Thomas, i. 303, 304 _bis_
  Peck, ii. 428
  Peckwater hall, iii. 155
  Pedenandre mine, iii. 382
  Pederick, Little, church, i. 74
  ―――― Little, parish, i. 404
  Pederwin, Pedyrwyn, or St. Pederwin parish, i. 37――iii. 457――iv. 69
  ―――― north, parish 336; or Pedyrwyn, i. 107――iv. 59, 131
  ―――― south, iii. 335; or Pederwyn, ii. 398, 417.――Pedyrwin, or
    Petherwin, iv. 50, 51, 52, 68, 69 _bis_
  Pedyr hundred, i. 230, 245――ii. 253 _bis_――iii. 175
  ―――― St. chapel at Treloye, i. 231
  ―――― St. priory at Bodman, iv. 160
  Pedyrick, Little, parish, ii. 253, 256
  Peel, Sir Robert, ii. 112
  Pegwill church, iii. 349
  Pelagianism, ii. 65. St. Dye opposed to 131
  Pelagians, ii. 63. Of Britain 73
  Pelagius, i. 305――ii. 72, 74. A Briton 63. His doctrines 72. Council
    at St. Albans to consider them, St. German preached against him 64.
    His doctrine contrary to the law and prophets, Britons convinced of
    his errors 65
  ―――― first pope, ii. 90
  ―――― second pope, i. 393
  Pelham, Bishop, iii. 275
  Pellew, Admiral, iii. 96.――Cruised from Falmouth, ii. 18.――Family,
    iii. 94
  Pelniddon, account of by Tonkin, i. 47
  Peloponnesus, ii. 366
  Pelsew, i. 393, 403. Account of 402, 417
  Pelton, i. 116 _bis_
  Pelvellan described, iv. 37
  Pelyn house described, and summer house at, ii. 391
  Pelynt manor, iii. 293
  ―――― parish, ii. 394, 398――iii. 39, 170――iv. 19, 23
  PELYNT parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name, a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation, manor of Plynt, iii. 291. By the Editor, ancient
    name ibid. Church spacious, monuments, burial-place of St. Juncus,
    Whitaker says the parish is dedicated to St. Nunn, St. David
    distinguished his followers by a leek 292. Church belonged to
    Newenham Abbey, value, Pelynt manor, Hale Barton and ancient
    remains upon it, Trelawn, its history by Bond 293, and that of its
    possessors, three generations of the Grey family annihilated by
    the civil wars, Trelawny family 294. Henry 5th’s partiality for
    Sir John, lines on Launceston gate, Cornish saying of the
    Godolphins, Trelawnys and Glanvilles, Lord Bonville built the
    house, rebuilt by Sir John Trelawny, and after a fire by Edward
    Trelawny, family portraits, chapel built by Bishop Trelawny 295.
    His history, the seven bishops committed to the Tower by James II.
    tried, and acquitted 296. Bishop Trelawny’s part in the
    Revolution, observation on the Duke of Marlborough, the bishop’s
    popularity in Cornwall 297. Cornwall disposed to rise in arms on
    his imprisonment, song upon it, universally sung at the time 298.
    Names of the seven bishops, statue of Cardinal Wolsey at Christ
    Church, Oxford, erected by Trelawny, his son Edward, governor of
    Jamaica, his judicious conduct there 299. History and fanaticism
    of Sir Harry Trelawny 300. Turned papist, priests arrived from
    Italy to celebrate masses for his soul, parish, statistics 301.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 302
  ―――― Church town, iv. 32 _ter._
  ―――― vicarage, iv. 29
  Pembre, Henry de la, ii. 119
  Pembro, by Leland, iv. 267
  Pembroke college, Oxford, ii. 233, 286, 287, 377――iii. 87, 88, 251
  ―――― Jasper, Earl of, ii. 182
  Pembrokeshire, ii. 173
  Pen, word explained, iv. 317
  ―――― Uchel Coit, iii. 25
  Penalmick barton, iv. 2, 4
  ―――― manor, iv. 2
  ―――― of Penalmick family, iv. 2
  Penaluna family, iii. 61
  Penare, account of, i. 204
  Penarth, i. 240.――Walter, iv. 77
  Pencair, by Leland, iv. 264
  Pencaranowe, iii. 326 _ter._, 327, 328
  Pencarow, i. 368. Account of 374
  ―――― of Pencarow, i. 369
  ―――― village, i. 3
  Pencoil, account of, ii. 89
  ―――― John de, ii. 89
  Pencoll, i. 387
  Pencoose, account of, i. 391
  Penda, King of the Mercians, ii. 284――iii. 284――iv. 125
  Pendanlase, iii. 431
  Pendarves, account of, i. 160, 163
  ―――― i. 135, 213, 302. Thomas 273, 276. Rev. Mr. 224.――Alexander,
    ii. 93. Peter 143. Samuel 93. Miss 300. Mr. 114. Arms 93.――Edward W.
    W., iii. 367. Henry 284. Rev. Henry and Margaret 84. Sir William
    382. Family 148 _bis_, 286, 343, 382.――Mr. iv. 2
  ―――― of Pendarves, i. 160, 163, 400, 401. E. W. W. 163, 164, 401,
    403. Rev. Thomas 161. William 160. Sir William 160, 163. Arms
    161.――Family and Miss, ii. 93
  ―――― of Roscrow, Mary, i. 137.――Alexander, his character, Rev. John,
    Mary, ii. 98. Miss 235, 239. Arms 98.――Samuel, iii. 303. Family 133.
    Mrs. Bassett their heir 303.――Family, iv. 107
  Pendeen, Dr. Borlase born at, iii. 51
  ―――― cove, ii. 290
  Pendene, account of, by Hals, ii. 282. By the Editor 284
  Pendenis castle, iv. 116; or Pendennis, iii. 136, 183, 217, 274. Sir
    N. Slanning, governor of 75
  Pendennis, the former name of St. Ives parish, etymology, island,
    old fortification, and chapel upon, ii. 258
  ―――― castle, i. 104, 105, 268――ii. 1 _bis_, 5, 6, 17, 280. Falmouth
    built for its supply 9. Situation, rent to the crown, etymology,
    description, extent, repaired by Henry VIII. and Queen Elizabeth,
    has contained above 100 cannon, and some thousands of foot arms,
    Sir Nicholas Parker appointed governor 12. Succeeded by Sir
    Nicholas Hals, who was succeeded by Sir Nicholas Slanning, and he
    by John Arundell, siege under him by the rebels, dreadful
    extremities, and surrender of the garrison, the last castle in the
    kingdom to yield, except Ragland in Wales 13. Soldiers killed by
    eating too freely, Col. Fortescue succeeded to the command, and
    after him Capt. Fox, who was succeeded on the restoration by Lord
    Arundell, and he by the Earl of Bath 14. The Killigrews lords of
    the land 17. Not Ictis 20. Its longitude 23. Rev. W. Jackman,
    chaplain 31. Governor and officers salaried by the crown 278
  Pender of Penzance, i. 148
  Pendew, account of, i. 324
  Pendinant, by Leland, iv. 271
  Pendinas and its pharos, by Leland, iv. 268
  Pendor, i. 148
  Pendower beach, iv. 123
  Pendragon, etymology, i. 326
  Pendre, i. 143. John, and arms 143
  Pendrea, i. 143 _bis_, 147――ii. 125.――In St. Burian,
    attorney-general Noye, born at, iii. 152
  ―――― Mr. iii. 16
  Pendrym manor, iii. 123
  Penferm, Matthew, iv. 3
  Penfon manor, ii. 232 _bis_――iii. 352
  Penfoune, iii. 352
  ―――― of Penfoune family, iii. 352
  Penfusis, by Leland, iv. 271
  Pengaer, iii. 225
  Pengally, i. 61
  Pengarswick, account of, i. 124
  Pengelly, i. 119 _bis_, 127――ii. 89
  Pengover, iii. 173
  Pengreap, ii. 133
  Penhale, i. 380, 387, 388.――In Egloskerry, iii. 137
  Penhall manor, iii. 313
  Penhallam, ii. 233
  Penhallinyk, ii. 140
  Penhallow, iii. 193
  ―――― Miss, iii. 421
  Penhalluwick, William, ii. 160
  Penhargard manor, ii. 153
  Penheale, i. 378. Account of 379
  Penhele in Egloskerry manor, iv. 60
  Penhell tenement, iii. 209
  Penhellick, account of, i. 207, 208
  ―――― Rev. Mr. ii. 118
  Penitentiaries, i. 232
  Penkevil of Penkevil family, iii. 214
  Penkevill, iii. 454. Tenement 209, 210. Account of 214
  Penkivell manor, iii. 182, 208
  ―――― arms, i. 297.――Family, ii. 336
  ―――― of Pensiquillis family, and Benjamin, i. 420
  ―――― of Ressuna, Richard, i. 297
  ―――― of Trematon, i. 297
  ―――― St. Michael, parish, i. 116
  Penknek, by Leland, iv. 277
  Penkridge, deanery of, in Herts, held by Tregony Archbishop of
    Dublin, iv. 144
  Penkwek, iii. 26, 27
  Penlee point, iii. 375
  Penleton bridge, i. 119
  Penlyer, Mr. 296
  Penmear manor, iii. 239
  Penn, Captain, ii. 25――iii. 85
  Pennalerick, Miss, iii. 62
  Pennalyky, William, iii. 324
  Pennance, account of, i. 257
  Pennans, account of, i. 255
  Pennant, i. 178 _bis_, 184. Account of 383
  Penneck family, ii. 217, 218. Origin 217. Anne, Catherine and
    Charles 218. Rev. John 217. Father and son 123, 218. Family
    monuments 219
  Pennington, i. 304
  Penniscen, iii. 283
  Pennock, ii. 170
  Pennore or Penarth, account of, ii. 113
  Pennycumquick, houses at Falmouth so called, story of the name, the
    same by Mr. Wynn, ii. 20
  Penpell, i. 243
  Penpoll, i. 247――iii. 343 _bis_, in St. Germans and Quethiock 359
  Penpons, account of, ii. 336
  ―――― of Penpons, ii. 335
  Penqueen, i. 118
  Penquite, ii. 91
  Penrey, iii. 305
  Penrice, i. 43, 47. Etymology 43
  Penrin, Mr. ii. 97
  Penrine, by Leland, iv. 271
  Penrith, ii. 76
  Penros, account of, iii. 429
  Penrose, i. 132, 346, 386――iv. 97
  ―――― ii. 157. Rev. John, his character 104. Martha 30, 32. Captain
    Thomas, his history 25. Journal 26, 27, 28, presented with a medal
    by the King of Sweden 27. His scuffle with Cornish seamen 29. Trial,
    conviction, pardon, death, and issue 30.――John and Richard, iii.
    324. William 324 _bis_. Mr. 112.――Admiral C. V. iv. 158. Notice of
    158, 159
  ―――― of Lefeock, Martha and Thomas, iii. 186
  ―――― of Nance in St. Martin’s in Kerrier, iii. 188
  ―――― of Penrose, Edward, and Richard, iii. 444. Miss 9 _bis_, 444,
    445. Mr. 442, 443. His house and hospitality 443. Family 443, 445.
    Arms 443
  ―――― of Tregethes, i. 364
  ―――― manor, iii. 445. Account of 443. Possessors 445
  Penryn, meaning of, iii. 327
  ―――― borough, account of, ii. 94. Corporation 8, 9. Members for, F.
    Basset 243. Sir William Lemon 229. Richard Penwarne 75
  ―――― hundred, ii. 51, 92
  ―――― manor, i. 231――iii. 2 _bis_, 226.――Bishop of Exeter, Lord of,
    ii. 51
  ―――― parish, i. 138, 242, 379
  ―――― river, iii. 231
  ―――― town, ii. 2, 17, 69, 96, 100, 113, 140, 215――iii. 62,
    64.――Ships obliged to go up to, ii. 9. United with Falmouth
    99.――Road from Helston to, iii. 63
  Penryn Penwid, iii. 431
  Pensandes, by Leland, iv. 265
  Pensants, by Leland, iv. 286
  Pensiquillis, account of, i. 420
  Penstruan, account of, i. 421
  Pentavale Fenton, iii. 394. Its etymology 395
  Pentavall, ii. 1
  Penter’s cross village, iii. 346
  Pentewan, account of by Hals, i. 41
  ―――― manor, iii. 190
  ―――― quarry, iv. 104.――By Editor, i. 50. Streamworks 51
  ―――― stone, iv. 104
  Pentillie, account of, iii. 163. Fine house built there 166
  ―――― castle, account of, iii. 346. Church aisle belonging to 346
  Pentilly, i. 316. Account of 314
  Pentine, Avice and Richard, ii. 398
  Pentire of Pentire family and heiress, iii. 193
  ―――― of Pentire in Minvor and of Pentewan in Mevagissey, Jane, iii.
    314 _bis_. Philip and family 314
  ―――― of Petuan, i. 384
  ―――― point, i. 381――iii. 240, 281. Its latitude and longitude 281
  Pentnar, i. 419
  Pentowen, by Leland, iv. 275
  Pentuan, i. 49
  ―――― manor, possessors of, iii. 193
  Pentwan, account of, by Tonkin, i. 47
  ―――― Lower, described, i. 47
  Pentybers Rok, iv. 238
  Penuans, i. 234
  Penularick, Miss, iii. 60
  Penvose head, iv. 94
  Penwarne, i. 236
  ―――― in Mawnan, i. 46――iii. 74 _bis_. Account of 75, 76. Sold 77
  ―――― in Mevagissey manor, iii. 192. Its possessors 191, 193
  ―――― i. 255.――Richard, ii. 9. He procured copies of the letters of
    Sir Nicholas Hals 10.――Richard, iii. 324, 325
  ―――― of Penwarne in Mawnan, John _bis_ iii. 77. Peter 76. His death
    77. Richard 75, 325. Robert, _bis_, 75. Robert and Thomas 77. Family
    75, 193. Arms 75, 77
  ―――― of Penwarne in Mevagissey, Vivian, iii. 193. The heir, and
    family 191
  Penwerris, i. 137
  Penwinnick manor, iii. 382
  Penwith hundred, i. 160, 228, 261, 344――ii. 118 _bis_, 141, 145,
    146, 169, 214, 234, 257, 269, 272, 282, 358――iii. 5, 30, 46, 78,
    140, 242, 283, 306, 339, 380, 381, 425 _bis_, 428――iv. 52, 53
    _bis_, 164 _bis_, 377.――Stone circles in, i. 141
  Penwortha manor, iii. 314, 315. Account of 314
  ―――― village, iii. 314 _bis_
  Penwyne, account of, iii. 66
  Penycuick, near Edinburgh, ii. 20
  Penydarran on the Taff, ii. 20
  Penzance, name explained, iv. 316
  ―――― borough, corporation of, iii. 90
  ―――― manor, iii. 91
  ―――― market, iii. 385
  ―――― town, i. 149――ii. 82, 120, 124 _bis_, 174, 214, 215 _bis_, 216,
    266, 287, 352――iii. 34, 55, 78, 275, 286, 287, 290, 342, 375――iv.
    166.――Account of, iii. 81, 83, 91.――London newspapers at and post
    to, i. 59.――Burnt, rebuilt, incorporated, its jurisdiction, a
    coinage town, its market, fairs, it favoured the royalists, and
    was sacked by the parliament army, iii. 81. Custom house, arms,
    and form of writ 82. Dr. Borlase educated at 51.――Exceeds Truro in
    beauty and in trade, iv. 85. Mr. Thompson died at 109
  Peran Arwothan, ii. 92
  ―――― Uthno, ii. 169
  ―――― well, ii. 2, 129
  Peransabulo, i. 289
  Peransand, i. 198――ii. 93, 173, 315, 317
  ―――― church, iii. 176
  Peranwell parish, iv. 1
  Perceval, Mrs. i. 163, 400
  Percivall, John, married Thomasine Bonaventure, lord mayor, and
    knighted, his death, iv. 134
  Perer, Richard, ii. 209
  Pereth, ii. 76
  Perin in Cornwall, news from, ii. 100
  Perkin, Mr. iii. 87 _bis_
  ―――― Warbeck took sanctuary at Beaulieu abbey, ii. 329
  Pernall, John, iv. 77
  Perr river, i. 44, 45
  Perran cove, iii. 309
  ―――― St. ii. 113――iii. 304, 309.――Visits St. Keverne, ii. 324.――His
    estimation, the supposed discoverer of tin, iii. 330. His history
    331, 332. His miracles 313. His great age, his shrine and banner
    332. His day 311
  ――――’s St. chapel or oratory, account of, iii. 329
  ――――’s St. college in Keverne, iii. 332
  ―――― Arworthall church, iii. 304
  PERRAN ARWORTHALL parish, or ST. PIRAN ARWORTHALL, in Kerrier.
    Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin and Whitaker, manor of Arworthall, iii.
    302. Quantities of tin upon it, chalybeate spring, Renaudin family
    303. By the Editor, saint, church, Perran Well village, change of
    road, smelting-house, extensive use of arsenic, its sublimation from
    ores 304. Ironworks of Messrs. Fox, beautiful valley, impropriation,
    advowson, statistics 305. Geology by Dr. Boase 306
  ―――― Arworthall, St. parish, iii. 224. In Kerrier 328
  ―――― Arworthall village, iii. 303
  ―――― Uthno manor, iii. 311
  PERRAN UTHNO parish, or LITTLE PERRAN. Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, iii.
    306. Manor of Uthno 307. By Editor, church, its situation, memorial
    to Mr. Davies, the oath of deans rural ibid. Oracular well, emptied
    by a mine, good farmhouses, Goldsithney village, its chapel 308.
    Image of St. Perran or St. James, fair, transferred here from
    Sithney, displaying of a glove at fairs, destruction of the Lionesse
    country, and cove where Trevelyan was borne on shore 309. High tide
    in 1099, noticed by Stow, the Godwyn sands, Editor’s opinion of the
    tale, attempt to restore the land by incantation 310. Acton castle,
    Cudden point, view from it, children go there to seek a silver
    table, manor of Uthno, and of Lan Uthno, in St. Erth, feast,
    statistics 311. Population increased in consequence of mining and
    agriculture, Chapel an Crouse, bowling green, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 312
  Perran well, or St. Perran’s well, iii. 303, 304. Curious account of
    308. Its virtues 329
  ―――― well village, situation, iii. 304
  ―――― Zabuloe parish, iii. 304, 386
  PERRAN ZABULOE, PERANSAND, or PERRAN IN THE SANDS. Hals’s MS. lost.
    By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation and boundaries, iii. 312.
    Ridiculous legend of St. Perran, his great age, patron of the
    tinners, tales told of him, fair, value of the benefice, patron,
    impropriation, incumbent, manor of Penhall and Halwyn, of
    Tywarnhaile, and of Tywarnhaile Tiers 313. Tywarnhaile house,
    Chapel Angarder, Penwortha manor, tin and lead upon it, Lambourne
    Wigan 314. Its history 315. Manor of Lambourn, its history 316.
    Creeg Mear, urns in it, conjectures respecting it 319. Castle
    Kaerkief, Whitaker’s opinion of it 320. Callestock Veor village,
    other entrenchments of no importance 321. Other two, Tresawsen, or
    Bosawson, the three barrows and four barrows, chapel in
    Callestock, Fenton Berram, manor of Fenton Gymps 322.
    Marghessen-foos village, practice of maids coming to market to
    offer themselves for hire, etymology of Marghessen-foos 323. Roman
    roads, Fenton Gymps family 324. Chywarton, Callestock-Ruol 325.
    Trevellance or Pencaranowe manor, its history, Reenwartha 326.
    Reen Wollas, Melingybridge 327. Manor of St. Piran, some tin on
    it, account of Piran round 328. By Editor, etymology ibid.
    Description of Piran round, the Guary Mir, “the Creation of the
    World,” and “Mount Calvary,” published by the Editor, St. Piran’s
    well supposed to cure diseases, encroachments of the sand,
    discovery and description of a chapel supposed to be St. Perran’s
    oratory 329. Defaced for relics, St. Perran esteemed the patron of
    all Cornwall, his day celebrated with great hilarity, a Perraner,
    St. Chiwidden, Dr. Butler’s Lives of the Saints 330. His history
    of St. Perran or St. Kiaran, went to Rome, was of the clan Osraig,
    died in Cornwall 331. Probably an active missionary, his banner
    the standard of Cornwall, his shrine, impropriation of tithes,
    incumbent 332. Chiverton, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 333
  Perranbonse cove, ii. 360
  Perraner, iii. 330
  Perre, Thomas, iii. 387
  Perrin, Provost of Taunton, i. 86
  Perron, St. Arworthal, ii. 17
  Perry, i. 236
  Persia, iii. 187
  Persius, iv. 87
  Perthcolumb, account of, i. 364
  Perthcothen, iii. 177
  Perthsasnac, ii. 165
  Perthtowan, ii. 250
  Perwennack, i. 11
  Pesaro in Italy, ii. 369, 370, 371, 373. Theodore Paleolagus of 365
  Pesseme, Patrick, ii. 160
  Peter, Rev. John, ii. 117
  ―――― of Harlyn, Francis, iii. 176, 177. Gregory 175, 176 _bis_. John
    76, 166, 176 _bis_. William 176 _bis_, 178 _bis_, 333. Mr. 178. Mr.
    erected a pier 179. Family 177
  ―――― of Porthcuthan, or Perthcothen. Mr. iii. 177. Family 162
  ―――― of Treater, John, ii. 336.――In Padstow, Thomas, iii. 176 _bis_
  ―――― of Trenaran in Padstow, John, iii. 176 _ter._ Arms 176
  ―――― St. i. 197, 198 _bis_――ii. 127.――Younger brother of St. Andrew,
    iv. 100
  Peter’s spring, iii. 72
  ―――― St. church, Rome, iv. 165
  Peterborough, Thomas White, bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  Peters, i. 382. Hugh 420. Mr. 296.――Rev. Mr. ii. 218.――Rev. Charles
    of St. Maben, his learning and character, iii. 67, 68. His
    biography, his ancestor a royalist 67. Dined his poor parishioners,
    his controversy with Warburton, extracts from his meditations 68.
    Elizabeth 72. Rev. Hugh 67, 71, 72. His biography 72. Rev. Jonathan,
    of St. Clement’s, Dr. Joseph, of Truro 68. Rev. Thomas and William
    71. Biographical notice of 72
  Petersfield parish, iii. 206
  PETHERICK, LITTLE, parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation and
    boundaries, saint, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, ancient
    name, iii. 334. By the Editor, present patron, church, and church
    town, Tregonnen village, St. Ida’s chapel ibid. Account of St. Ida,
    her husband a favourite of Charlemagne, another chapel on Trevelian
    farm, former name of the parish, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 335
  Petherick, Little, parish, iii. 277
  Petherwin, North, i. 377
  PETHERWIN, OR PEDERWIN, SOUTH, parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin
    and Whitaker, situation, boundaries, iii. 335. St. Peternus, three
    days dedicated to him, value of benefice, impropriation 336. By the
    Editor, church, its monuments and situation ib. Annual fairs,
    Trecroogo, Tregallen and Trethevy villages, Trebersey, Mr. Gedy an
    ancestor of the Editor, Tresmarrow, Tremeal 337. Death of Mrs.
    Archer, an epitaph, statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 338
  Petnell, St. or Petronel, iv. 153 _bis_
  Petre, Sir John, obtained church lands, was ancestor of Lord Petre,
    founded eight fellowships at Oxford, iii. 155. Sir John 293. Sir
    William 155. Lord Petre of Exeter, now of Essex 176
  ―――― of Torbryan, Devon, John, iii. 155
  Petroc, St. iii. 277, 278 _bis_. His life 227. His history, i. 95.
    His body stolen 98
  ―――― St. church, iii. 408. Bodmin 277. The Cornish see 415. This
    is disputed by Mr. Whitaker 408. proved by extracts from a register
    kept there in a book containing the four Gospels 408
  ――――’s, St. monastery, iii. 309. At Padstow, destroyed by the Danes 281
  ―――― St. priory, Bodmin, i. 116
  Petrocstow, iii. 277
  Pettigrew manor, ii. 57
  Petunia nyctaginiflora, iv. 182
  ―――― Phœnicia, iv. 182
  Petvin, John, iii. 313
  Pevensey marsh, iii. 10
  Pever, the heiress of, ii. 109
  Peverell, Sir Hugh, and Sir Thomas, i. 92
  ―――― of Hatfield, Jane, wife of Randolph, and concubine of William
    the Conqueror, i. 367 _ter._ William her son 367
  ―――― of park, i. 367. Richard Thomas, and arms 368
  Peverell’s crosses, i. 368
  Pewterers’ company send a deputy to try the Cornish tin, ii. 30
  Peyron, father, i. 192
  Philack, i. 344
  Philip and Mary, iii. 213, 294, 325
  ―――― King of France invaded Normandy in Richard’s absence, ii. 177
  Philipps, i. 78
  Philips, Jasper, iii. 339. Sir Jonathan 458. His servant 461
  ―――― of Pendrea, Samuel and Sarah, ii. 352
  ―――― of Poughill, ii. 300
  Phillack, i. 355.――Parish, ii. 141, 145, 146 _bis_, 147
  PHILLACK, parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation
    boundaries, saint, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, iii. 339. By
    the Editor, church, situation of village, danger from the sand,
    inundations of sand, hillocks of it ibid. Houses buried under it,
    Towan, extension of trade, improvement of the harbour, mining and
    smelting, Mr. Edwards 340. Rivalship with Mr. Harvey, both improved
    the harbour, bars in the mouths of all rivers, a causeway upon
    arches across the entrance of the main estuary 341. Castle Cayle,
    and Riviere at Theodore’s castle, Mr. Whitaker’s invention, new
    house at Riviere, Trevassack 342. Modern house on Bodrigy, Penpoll,
    Treglisson farm, copper works at Hoyle, smelting house at Angarrack,
    fine garden there, advowson 343. Incumbent, present rector and
    patron, parish feast and statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, Sand
    hills, sand restrained by plants 344. Sometimes consolidated into
    sandstone. By Editor, copper lodes and elvan courses, Whele Alfred 345
  Philleigh parish, ii. 265
  Philley parish, ii. 2, 275 _bis_, 279――iii. 402, 403
  Phillips, Matthew, i. 360, 362.――Rev. Jasper, ii. 146. Mary 269.
    Rev. William 386, 406. His monument at Lanteglos 406. Mr. 150, 386, 389
  ―――― of Carnequidden in Gulval, Henry and Jane, ii. 241
  ―――― of Landue, Thomas, ii. 400
  ―――― of Pendrea, Samuel, ii. 269, 352. Sarah 352
  ―――― of Tredrea, Elizabeth, iii. 159
  ―――― of Botreaux castle, T. J. iii. 236 _bis_
  ―――― of Camelford, Charles, John, and Jonathan, i. 380. Sir Jonathan
    134.――Rev. William 380.――Charles, ii. 399 _bis_. Jonathan, Rev.
    William, name 399.――Sir Jonathan and T. W. iii. 235
  Phillipps, Rev. William and family, i. 3.――J. T., iii. 42
  ―――― of Camelford and Newport family, iii. 42
  ―――― of Landue in Lezant, Mr. iii. 235
  ―――― of Trencares, Charles and Sir Jonathan, iv. 45. Rev. William
    45, _bis_. Story of 46. Miss, Mr. and family property 45
  Philological inquiries, ii. 103
  Philopatris, age of, ii. 76
  Philosophical Transactions, i. 149――iii. 250, 251, 378――iv.
    146.――Account of a storm in, ii. 325
  Phœnician castles, ii. 423
  Phœnicians, ii. 3――iii. 395――iv. 168.――Acquainted with Falmouth
    harbour, ii. 19
  Phœnix in her Flames, a tragedy, iv. 97
  “Phraseologia, Latin and English,” iv. 87
  Physalis edulis, iv. 183
  Picardy, pronunciation in, ii. 127
  Pider hundred, i. 9, 209, 231, 232, 289, 386, 388, 407――ii. 253,
    378, 384――iii. 139, 267, 277, 312, 318, 334――iv. 137, 140, 160
    _bis_, 162
  Pidre, iv. 376.――Etymology, i. 9
  Pig’s street, Penryn, iii. 62
  Pilate, iii. 422
  Pilchards, nature of, ii. 263. Methods of fishing for 261. Of
    preserving, oil from 263. Caught by seine nets at St. Keverne 324
  Pillaton, or Pillton manor, iii. 345, 346
  ―――― parish, i. 103, 104, 316――ii. 361, 364――iii. 161, 371
  PILLATON parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    a rectory, value, patron, manor, iii. 345. By the Editor, Lysons on
    Pillaton and Hardenfast manors, Pentillie castle, church and its
    monuments, one to the Rev. Mr. Eliot, church, town small, Penter’s
    cross village, patron 346. Statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 347
  Pinard, Arthur, ii. 423
  Pinaster fir, account of, iii. 11
  Pincerna, etymology of, ii. 148
  ―――― Richard, ii. 148. Simon 145, _bis_, 146 _bis_.――Simon, iii.
    139. Heir 140 _ter._ Family 140
  Pindar, iii. 34
  ―――― Peter, iii. 220
  Pineck parish, i. 414――ii. 142.――St. iv. 128
  Pinneck, John, ii. 170
  Pinnock, St. parish, iii. 13, 260
  PINNOCK, St. parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, iii. 347. By the
    Editor, village, and manor of Trevillis, proprietors of land,
    advowson, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 348
  Pinock, ii. 157
  Pipe Rolls, ii. 423
  Piper, Hugh, and Sir Hugh Constables of Launceston castle, anecdote
    of Sir Hugh, ii. 421. His monument in Launceston church 422.――Miss,
    iii. 136. Heiress and family 337
  Piran bay, iii. 313
  ―――― parish, iii. 324
  ―――― round, iii. 328. Account of 329――iv. 78
  ―――― Arworthall church, iv. 3
  ―――― St. church lands, iii. 328
  ―――― St. family, iii. 328
  ―――― St. manor, account of, iii. 328
  ―――― St. parish, iv. 2 _ter._ Mr. Reed’s smelting house in 4
  ―――― St. in the Sands parish, iii. 267
  ―――― St. in the Sands town, iii. 332
  Piran’s, St. well, iii. 322
  Piranes, St. in the Sands, by Leland, iv. 268
  ―――― St. or Keverine, by Leland, iv. 270
  Pirran in Treth parish, iii. 323
  Piskies or fairies, i. 18
  Pitleman, Ralph, ii. 427
  Pits’ writings on Britain, ii. 62
  Pits, iv. 145 _bis_, 148, de Illustribus Angliæ Scriptoribus 148
  Pitt, Robert, i. 69. Thomas 69 _bis_. Thomas 1st Lord Camelford 69.
    His talents 71. Thomas 66, 67. His descent, enterprise in India,
    return with diamond, its sale to the Regent Orleans, its weight, his
    purchase of Boconnoc and the burgess tenures of Old Sarum, election
    for Old Sarum 68. Thomas 2nd Lord Camelford, his birth and
    christening, education, history, character 70. Death 71. William,
    Earl of Chatham 69.――Family, ii. 339, 376, 412. Thomas 353, 354,
    409, 410. William 339. Governor 353. Mr. 410. Pleased with Dr.
    Glynn’s invitations 154.――Thomas, iii. 450. Mr. 207. Governor
    450.――Mr. iv. 44
  ―――― of Boconnock, Thomas, ii. 405
  Pitz, Rev. Mr. ii. 258――iv. 53
  Pius 2nd, pope, iv. 146
  Place of death, i. 9
  Place or Plase, i. 28
  Placentia, iii. 400
  ―――― University, i. 311
  Plague at St. Cuthbert, i. 292.――At St. Ives, ii. 271
  Plain-an-Guary, iii. 384
  Plantagenet, Princess Elizabeth, i. 63. Princess Katherine
    64.――Humphrey 4th son of King Henry 4th, ii. 260. Margaret,
    Countess of Salisbury 91. Richard Earl or Cornwall 155.――Richard,
    iii. 27
  ―――― or Beaufort, Edmund, Edmund Marquis of Dorset, and Henry, ii.
    260.――Margaret, iii. 65
  ―――― civil wars, iii. 289
  ―――― house of, ii. 110, 249
  Plantagenets, iii. 84, 246. Their times 8, 348――iv. 114
  Plants of Cornwall, App. 3, iv. 180
  Plase, ii. 40. Account of 43
  Plassey, battle of, i. 390――iv. 11
  Pleas of the crown, i. 119, 177
  Plegmund, Archbishop, i. 95
  Plengway village, Amphitheatre at, iii. 384
  Plint, i. 316
  Pliny, i. 192――ii. 408――iii. 328
  Plot’s, Dr. Natural History of Oxford, iii. 323
  Plowden, William, iii. 38. Mr. 37. Family 38
  Pluwent or Plynt, iii. 291
  Plym river, ii. 2
  Plymouth breakwater, ii. 245
  ―――― castle, i. 105――ii. 10
  ―――― church, dedicated to St. Charles, ii. 20
  ―――― dockyard, high water at, iii. 375
  ―――― harbour, iii. 101, 105, 108, 164, 375, 461.――Superior to
    Falmouth for large ships, ii. 18
  ―――― limestone, iv. 123 _bis_.――Burnt for manure, ii. 361
  ―――― reef or breakwater described, iii. 108. Compared with the great
    Egyptian pyramid 109
  ―――― road, ii. 396
  ―――― sound, i. 189――ii. 45, 108 _bis_, 164, 375, 379, 380. French
    and Spanish fleets in, ii. 245
  ―――― town, i. 113 _bis_――ii. 10, 224――iii. 21, 45, 98, 109, 110,
    121, 183, 189, 196, 253, 254, 283, 378, 399, 426――iv. 32, 115, 116,
    123, 187, 188 _ter._――Ruthven, governor of, i. 113.――Relief of,
    incompetent to sustain an attack, ii. 245. Cornish miners marched to
    defend, open to attack but escaped it, Major Trelawny, governor of
    67. Engagement with Dutch fleet before 25.――Dr. Borlase educated at,
    iii. 51. Besieged by Charles’s troops, Earl of Stamford, governor
    184.――General Trelawny, governor of, iv. 94. Siege of 185 _ter._
  Plympton, i. 170――iv. 185
  ―――― priory, i. 27――ii. 339――iii. 139 _bis_. Prior of 139
    _bis_.――Godfrey, prior of, ii. 426
  Plynt parish, ii. 409
  Pochehelle, iii. 349
  Poictiers, Archdeacon of, ii. 415
  ―――― Bishop of, St. Hilary, ii. 168, 169. Died at 169
  ―――― Earl of, Richard, ii. 422
  Point, the, iii. 107, 108
  Pol, St. de Leon, town, in Brittany, iii. 285
  Polamonter, Nicholas, i. 234
  Poland, i. 336
  Polbenro, account of, iv. 36
  Poldice mine, ii. 134
  Pole, Sir Courtenay and Penelope, ii. 379.――Rev. Reginald, iii.
    440.――De la, Edmund, Earl of Suffolk, i. 86
  ―――― Carew, Mrs. R., iii. 229
  Polglase, account of, i. 399
  Polgoda, ii. 173
  Polgooth mine, iii. 198. Account of 195, 197
  Polgorran, account of, ii. 113
  Polgover, iii. 252――iv. 3
  Poljew cove, ii. 129
  Polkerris harbour, iv. 109
  Polkinghorne, Roger, iii. 83
  Polkinhorn, iii. 387
  Polkinhorne, account of, ii. 142
  ―――― Degary, i. 257.――Mr. ii. 157. Rev. Mr. 258, 260
  ―――― of Polkinhorne, family, heir, and arms, iii. 142
  Polland, Lewis, ii. 195
  Pollard, Peter, i. 216.――Christopher, iii. 358
  ―――― of Treleigh, Hugh, John, John a tribute to, Margaret and
    family, iii. 383
  Polleowe, iii. 326
  Pollephant, i. 308
  Pollrewen tower, iv. 229
  Pollyfont or Pollifont manor, iii. 38, 39. In Lewannick 233 _bis_
  Polman, ii. 41
  Polmanter downs, ii. 271
  Polmear cove, iv. 166
  Polpear, iii. 7
  Polpera or Polperro, iv. 23, 36, 38
  Polperro harbour, ii. 400
  ―――― town, ii. 400 _bis_. Scenery beautiful 400, 401
  Polruan, ii. 411――iv. 36.――Account of, ii. 411.――By Leland, iv. 279,
    290.――Formerly a corporate borough, ii. 412
  Polruddon ruins, by Norden and Lysons, i. 46
  Polskatho or Porthskatho, ii. 51
  Polston, bridge at, ii. 432.――Bridge, Charles 1st entered Cornwall
    by, iv. 185
  Poltare, account of, iii. 88
  Poltesca, iii. 424
  Polton manor, ii. 253
  Polvellan, iii. 229. Etymology 230
  Polventon, iv. 29
  Polvessan, account of, iv. 133. The grounds in a fine state 35
  Polvethan manor, ii. 400
  Polwhele, account of, i. 205
  ―――― castle, iv. 229
  ―――― i. 56 _bis_, 58, 205, 255. Degory 19, 293. Arms 205. Motto
    206.――Family, ii. 337.――Rev. Richard of Manaccan and Newlyn, iii.
    113, 271. Character of 112.――Rev. Richard came from Truro, iv. 86.
    Rev. Richard communicated to the Editor some missing portions of
    Hals’s MS. 184
  ―――― of Newland, i. 105
  ―――― of Penhellick, John and Robert, i. 207
  ―――― of Polwhele, i. 207. Degory ibid. Drew 207 _bis_. John 206,
    207. Richard 207. Rev. Rich., 208
  ―――― of Treworgan, i. 396. John ibid.
  ――――’s History of Cornwall, i. 288
  Polybius, on Signals, the friend of Scipio Africanus, his general
    history, iii. 106
  Polychronicon, author of, iv. 93
  Polyenetes, or the Martyr, a tragedy, iv. 97
  Polyfunt in Trewenn, iv. 68
  Polygala speciosa, iv. 183
  ―――― myrtifolia, iv. 183
  Pomeray, i. 348
  ―――― Henry de la, ii. 180, 183. Took St. Michael’s mount 177.
    Murdered a sergeant-at-arms, his stratagem for surprising Mount St.
    Michael 178. Held it out, submitted, his death 180; or Pomeroye,
    Henry de la, iii. 22, 78, 90
  Pomeroy, Henry de, i. 295, 296. Henry 296 _bis_. Sir Henry 296. Sir
    Hugh 214. Joel 296 _bis_. Josceline, Ralph de, and Sir Roger 296.
    Thomas 214. Arms 297.――Rev. John, ii. 279, 339. Mr. 43.――Family,
    iii. 90. John 260
  Pomeroy of Bury Pomeroy, Devon, Sir Richard, iii. 148. Lords of Bury
    Pomeroy 90
  ―――― of Tregony Pomeroy, i. 297 _bis_. Henry 297
  Pomery, Rev. Mr. i. 403.――Rev. Joseph, iii. 348 _bis_.――Mr. iv. 160
  Pomier, Lord, ii. 39
  Pondicherry, siege of, chief seat of French power in India, iv. 11
  Ponsanmouth, iv. 3
  Ponsmur, i. 256
  Pontis Riale river, source of, iv. 237
  Pontus, i. 388 _bis_
  Pool mine, ii. 239
  Poole, account of by Hals, iii. 168. By Tonkin 170
  Pooley, Rev. Mr. ii. 34.――Rev. Henry of Newlin, iii. 271, 275
  Poor Knights of Windsor, Hugh Trevanion one of, ii. 52, 54. Governor
    of 55
  ―――― rates at Helston, ii. 159
  Pope of Rome, i. 139, 146――ii. 371. Urged Richard to the crusades
    177. Lodged Thomas Paleolagus, and allowed him a pension 368. His
    protection of him 371.――Alexander the 4th, i. 176.――Boniface, ii.
    288. Gregory 290. Gregory the Great 287. St. Gregory 288.――Gregory
    9th, i. 312. Innocent 3rd 110, 112. Innocent the 4th 176. Innocent
    the 5th 110. Leo the 9th 110 _ter._ Nicholas the 2nd 110. Pelagius
    the 2nd 393. Victor the 2nd 110 _bis_
  ―――― Alexander, the poet, i. 58――iii. 53 _ter._ His letter to Dr.
    Borlase 53. Mr. his large fortune, and house called the Vatican 88
  ――――’s annates, ii. 59, 126
  ―――― inquisition into the value of benefices, iv. 185. _See
    Inquisition_
  Popham, Sir Home and Captain, iii. 446
  Population of Cornwall, App. II. iv. 178. Of all the parishes in
    Cornwall from the last parliamentary statements 177. For several
    years from 1700 to 1831, 178
  ―――― return for Helston, ii. 161
  Porkellis, neighbourhood produced the best tin in Cornwall, ii. 140
  Porrown Berry, iii. 202
  Port, Hugo de, iii. 115
  Port Eliot, ii. 68, 70 _bis_――iii. 107
  ―――― Isaac, i. 384, 385――iv. 47
  ―――― Looe, iii. 249
  ―――― Looe barton, iv. 25, 26, 37 _bis_
  ―――― Prior, name changed, iii. 107
  Portbend, high water at, iii. 98
  Portbyhan, otherwise West Looe, iv. 28
  Portello, lands of, iii. 294
  Porter, i. 320.――Mr. and arms, iii. 66.――Charles, iv. 62. Rev.
    Charles of Warbstow 125
  Porth, i. 29
  Porth Alla, ii. 250, 324, 330 _bis_, 331. The stream which
    discharges at 330
  ―――― chapel, i. 12
  ―――― Enys, iii. 288. Name changed 286
  ―――― Horne, i. 324――ii. 174, 200
  ―――― Kernow, iii. 32.――Shells at, i. 148
  ―――― Prior, now Port Eliot, ii. 66
  ―――― Talland, iv. 24
  ―――― Treth, ii. 239
  Portheran, ii. 41
  Porthguin, by Leland, iv. 259
  Porthiley, iii. 129
  Porthissek, by Leland, iv. 259
  Porthleaven, iii. 444
  Porthmear, i. 47
  Porthmellin cove, iii. 192
  Porthoustock, ii. 324――iii. 259.――Extraordinary shoal of pilchards
    at, ii. 324
  ―――― rock, ii. 331
  Porthpean, i. 49
  Porthskatho cove, ii. 58
  Porthwrinkle, iii. 439
  Portionists, iv. 45
  Portnadle bay, iv. 28
  Porto Bello, iii. 218
  Portreath, ii. 241, 250.――Harbour, iii. 390.――A safe harbour, used
    to exchange copper for coal, ii. 241
  Portsmouth, ii. 246. Loss of the Mary Rose off 342
  ―――― castle, ii. 10
  ―――― harbour superior to Falmouth for large ships, ii. 18
  ―――― town, ii. 10
  Portuan borough, iv. 20, 21
  ―――― manor, iv. 21
  Portugal, ii. 227――iii. 187, 423
  Post, in Queen Elizabeth’s time, i. 59
  Potatoes being introduced into Cornwall, iv. 50
  Potstone, iv. 70
  Pott, John, iii. 16
  Poughill parish, ii. 340, 430――iv. 12, 15
  POUGHILL parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent, ancient name, impropriation,
    Pochehelle manor, iii. 349. By the Editor, small, its advantages,
    manor ibid. The charters, murder of Nicholas Radford 350. Flexbury
    and Bushill, impropriator of tithes, Stamford-hill and Sir B.
    Granville’s victory there, statistics, incumbent, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 351
  Poul pier, by Leland, iv. 290
  Poulpirrhe, by Leland, iv. 279
  Poulton manor, iii. 2
  Poundstock parish, ii. 232――iii. 114――iv. 15, 136
  POUNDSTOCK parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, impropriation, patron, incumbent,
    Trebarfoot, Penfoune, manor of Poundstock, iii. 352. By the Editor,
    situation of church, Tregoll, manors of Launcels, West Widemouth and
    Woolston, great tithes, advowson, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 353
  Powder hundred, i. 41, 52, 202, 388, 393――iii. 24, 55, 180, 190
    _bis_, 195, 198, 207, 210, 354, 391, 395, 402 _ter._, 403, 448,
    450――iv. 70, 71, 75, 97, 102, 115, 116, 117.――Powdre, i. 242, 251,
    294, 413――ii. 24, 36, 50, 88, 105, 275 _bis_, 298, 315, 352, 356,
    390――iv. 376
  Powderham hundred, etymology, i. 15
  Powell, David, i. 305
  Powley, Hugh, iii. 6
  Powvallet Coyt manor, ii. 38
  Poyctou, iv. 144
  Poyntz, of Berkshire, William and William Stephen, ii. 385
  ―――― of Cowdray castle, Sussex, William Stephen, iii. 231.――Family,
    ii. 354
  Pradannack manor, iii. 258, 259
  Praed, i. 346, 349. James 349, 350.――Family, ii. 241. Humphrey
    Mackworth, M.P. 264. His act for improving the fisheries at St.
    Ives 264.――Arabella and Catherine, iii. 10. Rev. Herbert 9. James
    and his marriage 11. Julia and Mary 10. William 9, 10. Character,
    marriage, &c. 10. Death 11. Colonel 8. Mr. 7, 8. His liberality 7.
    Mr. singular story of, and his death 9. Family, account of 8.
    Remark on 11. Name 9
  Praed, of Trevethew, Florence and James, i. 357.――H. M., iii. 9
    _ter._, 54, 93, 239. His character 9. Improved Trevethow and the
    plantations of Cornwall 11. Improved a valley 59. Rev. Herbert of
    Ludgvan, his son 54. James 444. Mary 239 _bis_. Miss 444. Mr. 85
    _bis_.――Mr. iv. 58. Family 54
  Prake, Mr. 110 years old, iv. 24
  Pratt, Mr. i. 283
  Preaching monks, i. 310
  Precays, i. 417
  Presbyterians, iv. 73.――Their rupture with Mr. Stephens, ii. 270
  Prest, Agnes, her history, i. 108. Place of her martyrdom 111
  Prestwood family, ii. 91. Thomas 196
  Pretender’s army defeated at Preston, ii. 112
  Prewbody, ii. 337
  Priam, iii. 418 _ter._, 420
  Price, Piercy, i. 275.――Winifred, ii. 93.――John, iii. 86 _bis_, 86,
    87, 289 _bis_. Found a ring, and erected a monument in memory of it
    289, 290. Rose 289. Sir Rose 85, 86. Story of 87. Lady 86. Mr. was
    of the expedition to Jamaica 85
  ―――― of Trewardreva, Thomas, ii. 93
  Prideaux, in Luxilian, the Hearles settled at, ii. 99
  ―――― castle, iii. 56
  ―――― i. 74, 76, 117, 266, 289 _bis_, 294, 299, 349, 385. Adiston
    160. Edmund 399. Matthew 349. William 160.――Dean, ii. 78. His
    “Connections” and remarks upon 76.――Notice of him, iii. 278. His
    house 281. Edmund 278. Family 238. Possess part of the tithes of
    Padstow 280
  ―――― of Boswithgye, Peter, i. 43
  ―――― of Devon, Sir Edmund, i. 259
  ―――― of Fewborough, i. 17――ii. 335
  ―――― of Gunlyn, i. 243, 244
  ―――― of Netherton, Devon, Sir Edmund, and arms, ii. 242.――Sir John,
    iii. 278. Family 237――iv. 137
  Prideaux of Orchardton, Sir John, i. 346, 347
  ―――― of Padstow, i. 172.――Had a staircase from Stowe, ii. 351.――Rev.
    Charles, iii. 279. Edmund 3. Nicholas, his character, built his
    house at Padstow 279. Mr. 56. Family, and arms 279. Monuments 280
  ―――― of Plase house, Edward, i. 17
  ―――― of Prideaux, Roger, Thomas, _bis_, family, and arms, iii. 56
  ―――― manor, iii. 57 _bis_. Account of 56
  Prince’s “Worthies of Devon,” i. 144, 346, 348――ii. 61――iii. 184,
    222――iv. 15
  Prince of Wales, iii. 222
  Prior park, i. 57, 58.――A house at Truro built of stone from, ii. 33
  Prior’s cross, i. 368
  Priory of Bodmin, i. 73. Its dissolution, and value of its revenues 74
  Prisk, i. 237
  Probus church, iii. 180――iv. 135
  ―――― and Grace Fair, iii. 364
  ―――― parish, iii. 180, 182, 188, 243, 269, 448, 450, 451――iv. 156;
    or St. Probus, ii. 2, 305, 353 _bis_
  PROBUS parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, impropriation, patron, impropriator, incumbent,
    manor of Moresk, Trehane, iii. 354. Carvean, Trewother, manor of
    Trelowthes, Trewithgy, Trevorva 355. Proverb upon it, Trewithan,
    manor of Wolveden or Golden 356. Ruin of the Tregians, Camden’s
    mention of it 357. Tonkin descended from them, list of their
    forfeited estates 358. The place where Cuthbert Mayne was found is
    still shewn, Tregian twenty years in prison, his son suffered a
    second loss of property 360. In consequence of the gunpowder plot,
    retired to Spain, the Marquis of St. Angelo, Talbot, Tredenham
    361. Curvoza 362. By the Editor, church and monuments, Mr. Thomas
    Hawkins introduced inoculation into Cornwall, church tower ibid.
    Compared with others, church was collegiate, a fair, Prince
    Charles visited most gentlemen in the west of Cornwall, Mr.
    Williams went up to congratulate the King on his Restoration 363.
    Name of the fair, the saints Probus and Grace, skeletons found in
    the chancel wall, Whitaker’s memoranda, parish feast, etymology of
    Carvean 364. Of Trewithgy, Trenowith, and Treworgy, manor of
    Probus, fortification in Golden 365. Supposed by Whitaker to be a
    Roman camp, Caer Voza, a British. Trehane, the two Dr. Stackhouses
    366. Trewithan, its beauty, Mr. Williams fond of ringing bells,
    peal at Kenwyn church for the amusement of the inhabitants of
    Truro 367. Hawkins family, persecution of Mr. Tregion, more
    victims to religious opinions suffered under Elizabeth than Mary
    368. Tregion’s connections, and especially his wealth incitements
    to his ruin, his own imprudence the ultimate means 369. Editor’s
    remarks on the transaction, and on the tyranny of the Tudor
    monarchs, statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 370.
    Interesting varieties of rock formerly to be seen on the road to
    Grampound, the road now turned 371
  Probus town, i. 242 _bis_, 251, 294, 393, 420. Tower at 48
  ―――― St. and his skeleton, iii. 364
  ―――― St. vicarage, iii. 182. The vicar 181 _quat._, 189
  ―――― Groguth, iii. 354
  Proclamation for the apprehension of Rogers and Street, i. 279
  Prophets, ii. 65
  Prospect, Cornish word for, ii. 200
  Protestants persecuted in Germany, iii. 67
  Prothasius, St. i. 99
  Prouse, ii. 54.――Digory, iii. 358
  Prout, arms, iii. 66
  Prowse, Mrs. Elizabeth, i. 8
  Pryce, Dr. William, iii. 323 _bis_.――His Archæologia Cornu
    Britannica, ii. 255――iii. 390. His Mineralogia Cornubiensis ibid.
    His Vocabulary 362
  Prye, William, i. 215
  Prynne’s records, i. 251
  Psalms, book of, iii. 262
  Psoralia aculeata, iv. 182
  ―――― pinnata, iv. 182
  ―――― spicata, iv. 182
  Ptolemy, i. 256――ii. 172, 199.――The Geographer, iii. 24 _bis_, 25
    _bis_, 395――iv. 39. His geography 8
  Puddicombe, Rev. S. ii. 397.――Rev. Stephen of Morval, iii. 253
  Puntner, harbour at, i. 48
  Purification, feast of, iii. 324
  Putta, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Pyder hundred, i. 115, 212, 404――ii. 89
  Pyderick, Little, parish, i. 212
  Pye, i. 62.――Family, line upon, and arms, iii. 449
  Pylos, ii. 368
  Pyn, Herbert de, iii. 117
  Pyne family, iii. 117
  Pynnock, St. parish, i. 112――ii. 291
  Pyrenees, iv. 159
  Pyrrhus’s saying after a hard earned victory, ii. 342

  Quaker’s meeting, ii. 35
  Quakers, iv. 73
  Quaram, Rev. Mr. rector of Falmouth, iv. 72
  Quarm, Rev. Mr. ii. 4
  Quarme, Robert and Walter, i. 422. Arms ibid.
  ―――― of Creed, Robert, i. 236
  ―――― of Nancar, Rev. Walter, i. 256. Arms ibid.
  Quarrier in Leskeard, iii. 21
  Queen’s college, Oxford, ii. 139, 239
  Question, Mr. iv. 118
  Quethiock parish, i. 409――ii. 361
  QUETHIOCK parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    iii. 371. Impropriation, value of benefice, patron, and incumbent
    372. By the Editor, ancient name, Trehunsey manor, Trehunest
    village, antiquity of the church, monuments, appropriation of
    tithes, once a college, its foundation deed printed ibid. The
    rector, now its sole representative, a former chapel, statistics,
    vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 373
  Quick, Anthony, James, John, iv. 55
  Quincy, Rev. S., i. 366
  Quiril, Peter, Bishop of Exeter, i. 300――ii. 412

  Radcliffe observatory, S. P. Rigand, director of, ii. 376
  Raddon, Richard de, ii. 427
  Raddona, Richard de, iv. 77, 82
  Radford, Nicholas, iii. 350
  Radnor, Earl of, i. 383――iii. 170.――Robarts, Earl of, ii. 377, 380.
    John 379, 380. Arms 380.――Last earl, iii. 193. Henry 381
  Raile, John, iii. 387
  Railway, i. 48.――Railways in Redruth, iii. 390
  Rainton rectory, i. 130
  Raith and Raithow, etymology of, ii. 394
  Ralegh, Piers de, Walter de, iii. 269
  Raleigh, Sir Walter, i. 390――ii. 7, 21, 56, 342
  Ralph, i. 344. John 352 _bis_. Rev. John 351, 352, 366. Loveday 352
    _bis_. Mary 352.――John, iii. 2
  Ram or Rame head, i. 343――ii. 106――iv. 32.――Description of, iii. 375
  Rame, Joanna de, iii. 374 _bis_, 438 _bis_. Arms 374
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 374, 375
  ―――― parish, iii. 101, 108, 110
  RAME parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, a
    rectory, value, patron, incumbent, manor of Rame, iii. 374. By the
    Editor, church peculiarly situated, monuments, manor and barton of
    Rame, Rame head, its appearance, and that of the Lizard, St.
    Michael’s chapel, description of the head, boundary of Plymouth
    harbour, its latitude and longitude, and establishment of the port,
    Edystone lighthouse 375. Its latitude and longitude, former danger
    of the rocks, description of the first lighthouse, remarkable storm,
    lighthouse disappeared, improved construction of the second 376.
    Generosity of Louis XIV. fire, terrible accident 377. Erection of
    the third lighthouse, Bond’s description 378. Inscription, Cawsand
    village, and bay, statistics, rector, and patron 379. Geology by Dr.
    Boase 380
  Rame place, iii. 375
  Randall, Thomas, steward of Helston, ii. 160
  Randill, Jonathan, iii. 260
  Randolph of Withiel, iv. 161
  Randyl family, and arms, ii. 353
  ―――― of Tregenno, Richard, i. 421. His arms 421
  Raphel manor, ii. 400
  Rascow island, iv. 230
  Rashleigh, i. 43, 74, 106, 255. Charles, constructs Seaforth harbour
    47. Establishes fishery 48. Origin and history of the family, and
    arms 43.――Family, ii. 91, 294. Philip 295. Philip endowed a hospital
    at Fowey 43. Made a fortune by privateering 44. Purchased the manor
    of Fowey, his ancestors represented it in parliament 46. Philip, a
    zealous naturalist, has published two volumes 47. William 46, 91,
    92. Mr. 397.――Miss, iii. 443. Family 57.――Jonathan, iv. 101. Philip
    140. Mr. 114. Family 99 _bis_, 131, 137 _bis_
  Rashleigh of Disporth, Charles, i. 260, 423
  ―――― of Menabelly, Rachel, i. 257, 259――William, ii. 294, 295. Mr.
    400.――William, iii. 290. Miss 367. Mr. 88. Family 57.――Jonathan and
    Jonathan, ii. 107. Jonathan and his son ibid. Jonathan 109. Rev.
    Jonathan 108. John and John 107. Philip 109. Philip, collector of
    Cornish minerals, has published specimens, constructed a curious
    grotto, his marriage and death 108. William 108, 109 _ter._ Family
    107, 109. One of them sitting in almost every parliament of George
    II. and III. 107
  ―――― of Penquite, Coleman and John, iii. 57
  ―――― house in Ranelagh parish, Devon, iv. 101
  Rat island, iv. 230, 266
  Ratcliffe of Franklyn, Devon, Joshua and his daughter, iii. 76
  Ravenna in Italy, ii. 75 _bis_
  Ravenscroft of Cheshire, arms, i. 374
  Rawe, R. J., iii. 387
  ―――― of Pennant, John, i. 383
  Rawle, i. 263――ii. 274. Mr. 273
  Rawlegh’s “Relicta Nomen Viri,” iv. 155
  Rawlinge, Mr. iii. 82
  Rawlings, Thomas, built a house, and William, notice of, iii.
    280.――Thomas, iv. 143
  ―――― of Padstow, Thomas, i. 235, 310.――Thomas, ii. 256.――Rev.
    William, iii. 282. Mr. 178
  Rawlins, Rev. William, jun., ii. 273
  Rawlinson, Mary, and T. H. of Lancaster, iii. 137
  Rawlyn, John, iii. 358
  Ray, the botanist, iii. 173
  Raynwood, John, iii. 211
  Reading, iii. 10
  Rebellion, story of the great, i. 44. History of Flammock’s 86
  Red Cross street, London, iv. 86
  Red sea, place of banishment for exorcised spirits, iii. 48
  Redevers, Earl Baldwin de, ii. 427
  Redgate, i. 179 _bis_. 180 _bis_
  Redinge, i. 206
  Rediver mills, iv. 47
  Redman, Richard, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 189――iii. 147
  Redruth manor, possessors of, iii. 381
  ―――― parish, i. 160, 208, 238, 239――ii. 129, 239 _bis_, 272,
    284――iii. 5, 7――iv. 5
  REDRUTH parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, a rectory, value, patron, iii. 380. Manor, town, Carew
    brief in Penwith hundred, town now considerable, large corn market,
    had two weekly markets in the reign of Edward III., proceeding of
    Mr. Buller, town chiefly one street 381. Old chapel, landed
    proprietors, manors of Treruff and Tollgus 382. Treleigh manor,
    Tonkin’s tribute to Mr. Pollard, Park Erisey, the barton of Treleigh
    produces tin and copper, the owner imposed upon 383. Plain an Guary,
    church beyond the town, glebe, value of benefice 384. By the Editor,
    situation and description of church, St. Uny, advowson, new chapel,
    Tavistock abbey ibid. Life of St. Rumon, by Leland and Butler,
    etymological conjecture, copper works and slate, handsome shops, and
    good market, quantity of shoes, &c. brought from Penzance 385.
    Market much crowded, new market place, Lord Dunstanville’s clock and
    bell tower, village of Plengwary, Amphitheatre adjacent to,
    etymology, the village called Little Redruth, parish muster book
    386. Great scarcity in 1697, the Flammock insurrection, manor and
    honor of Tehidy, Cornish, Saxon and Norman acre, difference
    between the common and statute acre 388. Extent of Tehidy, notice of
    Lord Dunstanville’s death, meetings to commemorate his virtues,
    monument to be erected on Cambre 389. Landed proprietors, Dr. Pryce,
    railways from Portreath harbour, statistics, incumbent, patron,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, important mining district 390
  Redruth town, iii. 381. Road to Marazion from 308.――From Truro, ii. 304
  ―――― Little, village, iii. 386
  Reed, Thomas, iv. 3, 4 _bis_. His ancestors 4
  Reenwartha, iii. 328. Account of 326
  Reenwollas, iii. 327 _bis_
  Refishoc manor, iii. 195, 196
  Reform Act, i. 391――iii. 29.――Change produced by, i. 390.――Remarks
    on, iii. 272
  Reformation, iii. 264, 279, 363
  Refry, Henry, iii. 387
  Regent street, iii. 205
  Reginald, Earl of Cornwall, ii. 427 _ter._, 428
  Regulus an abbot, iv. 105
  Reid, i. 259
  Rekellythye, iii. 324
  Relics of antiquity dug up near Camelford, ii. 402, 403
  Religious ceremonies of the Britons, i. 193
  Relistion mine, ii. 144
  Remfry, Henry, iii. 383. Richard 382
  Renaudin, David, John, family, and arms, iii. 303
  ―――― of Arworthal, David, iii. 225 _bis_
  Rendall of Lostwithiel, Elizabeth and Walter, iii. 328
  ―――― of Pelynt, family, iii. 328
  Renfry, Sondry and Thomas, iii. 387
  Rennie, John, the engineer, iii. 378
  Renphry, his son, sold Trewithan, iv. 140
  Reperend Brygge, iv. 255
  Reschell, iii. 111
  Rescorla, i. 49
  Reskimer, by Leland, iv. 270
  ―――― iii. 169.――Heir of, iv. 156
  Reskymer, account of, iii. 133
  ―――― family, ii. 358――iii. 126, 135, 423.――Arms, iv. 96
  ―――― of Reskymer, John, iii. 133. Sir John 133, 147. John and four
    daughters, Richard, Roger and arms 133. Mr. 147 _bis_
  Resogan, Bennet, and John, sen. iii. 325. John, jun., 325, 326
  ―――― of St. Stephen’s in Brannel, iii. 325
  Resparva, i. 386
  Respiration, Dr. Mayne upon, iii. 250
  Restoration, iii. 73
  Restormal, iii. 28
  Restormalle castle, iv. 229
  Restormel, i. 338――iv. 81. By Leland 277
  ―――― castle, ii. 38.――Account of 392
  ―――― hill, ii. 393
  ―――― house, ii. 393
  Restowrick, i. 310
  Restrongar creek, ii. 24
  ―――― passage, ii. 17
  Restonget creek, iii. 224
  ―――― manor, iii. 230, 231. Account of 226
  ―――― passage, iii. 226
  ―――― village, iii. 226
  Resurra in St. Minver, ii. 336
  Resurrans, i. 214. 215 _bis_
  Retallock, iii. 143
  ―――― barrow, account of, i. 220
  Retollock of Trewerre, i. 391
  Revell, Richard, ii. 180
  Revenge, man of war, destroyed in a glorious victory, ii. 342, 344
  Rewley abbey, ii. 138, 139.――Near Oxford, iv. 4 _bis_. Edmund Earl
    of Cornwall’s charter to 4
  Reynolds, i. 61 _ter._, 85. Admiral Carthew, his death 205.――Sir
    Joshua, ii. 306. Admiral, lost at sea 389. Mr. 241. Family 142.――Mr.
    iii. 354
  Rhé, isle of, iii. 183
  Rheese, ii. 173
  Rhodes, Rev. George, i. 354.――Miss, ii. 227. Family 100
  ―――― isle of, i. 411
  Rhys ap Tudor, iv. 8
  Rialobran, iii. 80
  Rialton, Godolphin Lord, i. 123, 126, 234
  Rice, i. 237
  Rich, Lady Lucy, and Robert Earl of Warwick, ii. 379
  Richan, iii. 402
  Richard, Duke of Gloucester, made sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 185
  ―――― 1st, King, i. 54――ii. 118, 177 _bis_, 178, 180 _quat._, 341,
    409――iii. 27 _bis_, 78, 132, 202, 393――iv. 71, 100 _bis_, 102 _bis_,
    112.――Cœur de Lion, i. 254――ii. 249――iii. 7.――Taken prisoner, ii.
    178. Ransomed, returned home, raised an army, and defeated John 179
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 59, 62, 93, 176, 181, 294, 341, 394, 422, 431――iii. 27
    _bis_, 60, 65, 111, 129 _bis_, 148, 269, 303, 436――iv. 22, 36, 99, 101
  ―――― 3rd, ii. 43, 108 _bis_, 115, 185, 231――iii. 101, 102 _ter._,
    142, 184, 203, 393. Slain at the battle of Bosworth 108 _bis_, 185
  ―――― King of the Romans, i. 36, 253, 414――ii. 109, 211 _bis_, 392,
    403――iii. 448――iv. 4 _ter._――Earl of Cornwall, ii. 8, 156――iii. 15,
    19, 28, 169, 268, 285, 448. Notice of 28. Arms 169
  ―――― St. King of the West Saxons, and his death, iv. 126
  ―――― of Shrewsbury, ii. 186, 187 _bis_
  Richardia, Æthiopica, iv. 182
  Richards, William, iii. 153
  Richardson, i. 383
  Richmond, Earl of, ii. 108 _bis_――iii. 101, 102. Edmund of Hadham 65
  Ridgeway, Earl of Londonderry, i. 69.――John, ii. 70
  Rigaud, S. P., ii. 376
  Rillaton manor, iv. 7
  Rimo, ii. 50
  Rinden, i. 117
  Ringwood of Bradock, Miss, iv. 139
  Risdon’s History of Devon, i. 133.――Manuscript, ii. 341
  Risdon of Babeleigh Giles, iv. 157
  ―――― of Badleigh, Giles, i. 223
  Rist church, i. 148
  Rivers in Cornwall, list of, iv. 223. Their sources 237
  Rivers, Thomas, i. 177
  ―――― Richard Woodvill, Earl of, i. 194
  Riviere, iii. 342 _ter._
  Roach, in France, taken by the English, ii. 177
  Roach parish, i. 41, 212, 218, 310――ii. 1, 93――iii. 195, 442,
    448――iv. 137, 160
  ROACH or Roche, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient name, antiquity of the parish and town, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, ancient chapel, iii. 391. Description
    of its remains, a pool supposed to ebb and flow 392. The story
    from whence its name of St. Gundred’s well is derived, Treroach or
    Tregarreck, Tremoderet en Hell, ruins of Holywell 393. Hains
    Burrow, Avoh Bicken, every parish in Cornwall formerly had a
    beacon, Colefreth, ruins of a chapel at, well near Pentavale
    Fenton 394. Etymology 395. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    saint, his history ibid. Parish named before he was born, a
    rectory, its value, patron, incumbent, society for purchasing
    advowsons, Tregarick manor, etymology 396. By Whitaker on the
    name, hermitage in the rock 397. By the Editor, the rock and tower
    conspicuous, Lysons says the cell was dedicated to St. Michael,
    Mr. Whitaker draws on his fancy 398. Lysons’s view and description
    of the hermitage, incumbents 399. Observations on the society for
    purchasing advowsons, parish could not be dedicated to St. Roche,
    history of St. Roche, his miraculous cure from the plague 400.
    Pimples called after him, statistics, incumbent, patron, Geology
    by Dr. Boase, the rock compared with St. Mewan beacon 401
  ―――― rock, i. 189――ii. 283――iii. 265
  ―――― St. church tower, ii. 386
  ―――― St. curacy, ii. 389
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 384
  Road, Truro, i. 227
  Roadstead near St. Ives, ii. 260
  Robartes, i. 384. Lady Essex 378, 379. Seized with small pox a month
    after her marriage 379. Francis 297. Henry Earl of Radnor 293. John
    Earl of Radnor 19, 297, 378, 279. Lord 113, 116. Sir Richard
    293――ii. 9.――Family, iii. 258.――John, ancestor of Charles Bodville,
    Earl of Radnor, John mayor of Truro, iv. 73. John Lord, Baron of
    Truro 74. Lord 161, 185, 187. Family acquired great wealth at Truro,
    engaged in mercantile pursuits there for three generations, rose to
    eminence and acquired the earldom of Radnor temp. James 1st 88
  Robarts, i. 74.――Frances, ii. 379. Francis, Henry and John, origin
    of the family 381.――Family, iii. 57.――Robert, Viscount Bodmin, ii.
    379 _bis_. Esteemed by Charles 2nd 380. John Lord Robarts Earl of
    Falmouth, afterwards Earl of Radnor 379, 380, 382. Earl of Radnor
    377. Charles Bodville 2nd Earl 380. Henry 3rd Earl 380, 381. John
    1st Earl 379, 380, 381, 382. John 4th Earl 381. Richard Lord Truro
    380, 383. His arms 380
  ―――― of Lanhidiock family, iii. 193, 197
  ―――― of Truro, Richard, iii. 234. Family 348
  Roben, John, iii. 387
  Robert, son of Ankitil, ii. 427
  ―――― Duke of Normandy, iii. 462
  ―――― son of William the Conqueror, ii. 211 _bis_
  Roberts, Sir Richard, i. 19 _bis_.――Richard, ii. 375. Family 170,
    397.――Francis, iii. 170. Family 178
  ―――― of Coran, Hon. John, i. 419
  ―――― of Truro, ii. 93
  Robins, i. 53――ii. 151.――John, iii. 260.――Benjamin, his Mathematical
    Works, iv. 10. Stephen and Miss 156. Family 162
  ―――― of Penryn, James and Thomasine, iii. 134
  ―――― of Tregenno, i. 421. Stephen 421
  ―――― Verian family, John, iv. 116. Arms 117
  Robinson, i. 302. George 303.――Family, ii. 217, 358. George 358.
    William 160 _bis_.――George and his heirs, iii. 419. P. V. 419, 424.
    Rev. William of Ruan Major 419. Miss 75. Mr. 419, 421, 424. Family 423
  ―――― of Cadgwith, George Thomas, his melancholy death, iii. 421.
    Arms 422
  ―――― of Nanceloe, or Nansloe, ii. 139. Rev. William ibid.――iii. 419
  ―――― of Treveneage, Mr. killed by a bull, ii. 221
  Robyns, Mr. iii. 88
  Roche, St. iii. 395, 397, 398――iv. 139.――His history by Hals, iii.
    395, 400. By Editor 400. His death, ib. Supposed to preside over
    certain complaints 401
  Roche parish, iii. 55, 450
  Rochelle, iii. 183
  Rochester, St. Just, Bishop of, ii. 282, 287.――St. Justus and St.
    Paulinus, Bishops of, iii. 284
  Rock, story of one turning round, i. 187
  ―――― ferry in St. Minver, iii. 275, 282, 283
  ―――― island, ii. 1
  Rocks near Land’s End dangerous, iii. 430
  Rodd family, ii. 228, 229. Miss 227. Mr. 134.――Mr. iii. 8
  ―――― of Herefordshire, Capt. Francis, ii. 228
  ―――― of Trebartha, Rev. Edward, ii. 228. Edward, D.D. 281. Col.
    Francis 228. F. H. ib. _bis_, 229. Jane, Adm. Sir J. T. and Harriet
    228. Mr. 99
  ―――― of Trebather, Francis, i. 359. Francis Hearle 360
  Rodda, Miss, ii. 82
  Roderick, King of Wales and Cornwall, iii. 80
  Rodolph 2nd Emperor of Germany, ii. 371
  Rogate parish, Sussex, iii. 205, 206
  Rogers, Anne, i. 270 _ter._, 271, 274. Rev. Edward 242. John
    273.――Brian, iii. 76. Rev. John 137. Rev. John, Rector of Mawnan 77,
    445. His taste, &c., 445. Nicholas 387. Peter 76. Family 75. Arms 76
  ―――― of Antron, Captain John, iii. 445. Improved that place 446
  ―――― of Cannington family, iii. 76
  ―――― of Helston and Penrose, Hugh, John, and John, M.P. the latter
    added to his estates, iii. 445――Of Penrose, near Helston, i.
    228.――John, ii. 128, 243. Mr. 117.――John and Mrs. iii. 88
  ―――― of Skewis, i. 267. Henry 267, 284, 285, 286, 287 _bis_. His
    character 267. Turns his sister-in-law out from Skewis house,
    resists the Sheriff, several men killed 268. Escapes to Salisbury,
    taken, convicted, and executed 269. His trial for the murder of
    Carpenter 270. Defence 272. Trial for the murder of Woolston 274. Of
    Willis 276. Seen in prison 281. Print of him, with his history 282.
    Newspaper reports of the trial 283. His wife 271, 272, 273. His son
    280. Editor’s conversation with 280
  Rogers of Treasson, afterwards of Penrose, John, iii. 47. Rev. J.,
    54. Family 47
  Rogroci, and Lestriake in Germow and Brake, iii. 360
  Rollandus, i. 98
  Rolle, i. 151. Sir Henry 2.――Family, Robert, ii. 313. Samuel 313
    _ter._ Lord 87.――Dennis, iv. 136. Family 41
  ―――― of Stephenton, Henry, iv. 40.――Of Stevenston, John, ii.
    343.――Mr. iii. 117. Family 254
  Rolles family, iii. 117 _bis_
  Rollo, Duke of Normandy, ii. 344, 347
  Rolls family, ii. 416
  Roman army, i. 335
  ―――― calends, iii. 258
  ―――― camp, iii. 319――iv. 78
  ―――― Catholics, persecution of, iii. 368
  ―――― coins, iv. 30.――Found at Camelford, ii. 403
  ―――― Emperor; i. 195
  ―――― fort in Probus, iii. 365
  ―――― idols, iv. 101
  ―――― invasion, iii. 162
  ―――― legions, i. 335
  ―――― martyrology, iv. 96
  ―――― road, iii. 324――iv. 12; or way 15.――From Lincolnshire to Bath,
    and through Somersetshire to the west, iii. 324
  ―――― saturnalia, ii. 164
  ―――― territories in Gaul, i. 335 _bis_
  ―――― work at Berry park, iv. 31. On West Looe Down 29, 30, 31
  Romans, i. 256, 295, 334 _ter._, 335 _bis_――iii. 395.――Encamped in
    various parts of Cornwall, ii. 19. Their castles 423.――Directed
    their roads to the nearest and best fords, iv. 30
  ―――― Richard, King of the, i. 36, 253, 414――ii. 109, 211 _bis_, 392,
    403――iii. 285, 448――iv. 4 _ter._ and Earl of Cornwall, ii. 8,
    156――iii. 15, 19, 28, 169, 268, 285, 448 _bis_
  Rome, i. 197 _quat._, 198 _bis_, 206, 334, 335, 393――ii. 369――iii.
    284, 331, 400, 431, 434 _bis_――iv. 126 _bis_, 146, 148. St. Gorian
    beheaded at 112. Indulgences from, for building Bideford bridge 341.
    Thomas Paleologus arrives at 368. Foreigners prohibited from living
    at 371. Greek college founded there 370, 371. Scotch college 371.
    Jubilee of 1601 at 371
  ―――― artists of, iv. 169
  ―――― church of, iii. 357, 368――iv. 165
  ―――― Emperor of, ii. 75
  ―――― St. John Lateran, church at, iv. 165
  ―――― Lateran, gate of, iv. 165
  ―――― papal, tower of, i. 312
  ―――― see of, iii. 150
  Romney, Kent, ii. 202, 210. A Cinque port 38
  ―――― marsh, iii. 10
  Romulus, i. 333
  Roofs, security for, iii. 243
  Roper, Edward, iii. 37. Elizabeth 140
  ―――― of St. Winow, iv. 156
  Roscarnon, ii. 24
  Roscarrack, account of, i. 384
  ―――― family, ii. 357
  ―――― of Roscarrack, i. 384. Charles, John, _bis_, and Richard 384
  ―――― burial place, i. 385
  Roscarrock, Mr. i. 214.――Thomas and Mr. iii. 314. Family 193, 240
  ―――― of Croan, i. 371
  Roscorla, account of, i. 44
  ―――― George de, i. 44 _bis_
  ―――― of Roscorla in St. Austell, William, iii. 188
  Roscrow in Mabe, iii. 125.――Account of, ii. 93, 98
  ―――― family, ii. 93
  ―――― of Penryn, Julian, i. 144, 145
  ―――― of Roscrow, i. 145.――Family and arms, ii. 337
  Roscruge family, and etymology of the name, i. 39
  Rose, no wild ones in the southern hemisphere, iii. 173
  Roseath manor, iv. 3
  Rosecadwell, possessors of, iii. 88
  Rosecorla, i. 420
  Rosecossa, account of, ii. 279
  ―――― Sir John, ii. 279
  Rosecradock, i. 196, 381.――In St. Clear, iii. 172
  Rosehill, iii. 88
  Rosemadons, i. 145
  Rosemodens, manor of, in Buryan, St. Hilary, Paul, and Guinear, iii. 360
  Rosemodris, i. 150
  Rosemorron, account of, ii. 124
  Rosemullion head, iii. 177
  Rosesilian, ii. 398
  Roseteague, ii. 56, 57
  Roseundle, account of, i. 44
  Rosevithney, account of, iii. 47
  Roseworth, account of, ii. 317
  Rosillian, i. 53, 54
  Roskuroh, account of, i. 383
  Roskymer family, ii. 128
  Rosland, ii. 50 _bis_
  Rosmeran, i. 136
  Rosminver, iii. 237
  Rosmodrevy, i. 141 _bis_
  Rosogan, James and John, ii. 192――John, iii. 333
  ―――― of St. Stephens, Elizabeth, i. 400. John 399 _ter._ Arms 400
  Ross, Dr. John, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 224――iii. 300.――Solomon de,
    ii. 336
  Rosswick manor, ii. 358
  Rosteage, account of by Hals, ii. 54. By Tonkin 56
  Roswarne, i. 162, 164
  ―――― De, i. 162 _bis_
  Rother, Jane, i. 357
  Rouen, Archbishop of, appointed Regent by Richard 1st, ii. 178
  Rough Tor, i. 131, 132, 201, 307, 310
  Round table, ii. 308
  Rous, Sir Anthony, Recorder of Launceston, ii. 423.――John, iv. 145
  ―――― of Halton, Anthony, i. 313 _bis_. Francis 315. Arms 313
  Rouse, Henry, i. 215.――Captain, Governor of St. Mawe’s castle for
    Cromwell, ii. 277. Lines upon him 278. Robert of Wootton converted
    part of a barn at St. Mawe’s castle into a Presbyterian
    meeting-house, his marriage 278
  Rovier, iii. 342
  Rowe, Rev. John, ii. 432. Rev. William 252. Mr. 139, 157.――Family,
    iii. 215 _bis_, 239
  Rowle, Roger, iii. 185. William 386
  Royal society, iii. 52, 53, 378
  Royalists concealed in a vault, i. 143
  Ruan castle, account of, iii. 403
  ―――― St. iii. 419
  ―――― Lanihorne manor belonged to the Archdekne family, iv. 121
  ―――― or Lanyhorne parish, i. 294――ii. 2, 356――iii. 40, 385――iv. 115,
    117 _bis_, 121
  RUAN LANIHORNE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient name, value of benefice, iii. 402. Patron, incumbent, land
    tax, Tregago, its etymology 403. By Tonkin, situation and
    boundaries, value of benefice, Lanyhorne castle ibid. Situation and
    description of it, pulled down, turned into a little town, trade by
    shipping 404. A rectory, value, patron, two incumbents 405. By the
    Editor, situation of the church, the creek stopped up, the castle,
    Arcedekne family ibid. Manors of Lanihorne and Elerchy, Treviles,
    Mr. Whitaker’s account of this parish, memoir of him, his death 406.
    Memorial, Editor’s character of him, and of his writings, his
    defence of Mary Queen of Scots 407. His error respecting the ancient
    cathedral of Cornwall, has printed two volumes on the subject,
    containing invective against Dr. Borlase and others, extracts made
    by Mr. Forschall from a MS. in the British Museum, description of
    the volume 408. The extracts in Saxon 409. List of the Bishops of
    Cornwall and of Devonshire 415. See tranferred to Exeter, reason of
    Edward the elder for endowing the Bishoprick of Crediton,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 416
  Ruan Major, or St. Ruan Major parish, ii. 116, 358――iii. 128, 257,
    385, 421, 423 _bis_. Rectory 258
  RUAN MAJOR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, barton of Erisey,
    iii. 16. Family, story of Mrs. Erisey leaving her husband and taking
    her daughter with her, his distress compared with Hector’s on
    parting with Andromache 417. Translation of Hector’s address to
    Andromache, Hals’s deduction from it of Homer’s and Hector’s opinion
    upon marriage, dexterity of another, Mr. Erisey admired by James
    1st, who objected to his name 418. Parish existing before Wolsey’s
    Inquisition, value, patron, land tax 419. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent. By the
    Editor, family, and barton of Erisey, advowson ibid. Hals’s specimen
    of Homer, the same passage from Pope, statistics, incumbent, patron,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 420
  Ruan Minor parish, ii. 116, 319, 358――iii. 128, 385, 416, 419
  RUAN MINOR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, patron,
    incumbent, Cadgwith, Mr. Robinson’s encounter with a bull, iii. 421.
    He died in three or four days, opinions of his neighbours, our
    Saviour’s judgment, Meneage comprehended in Lizard, etymology of
    Lizard and the dangerous nature of the coast 422. By Tonkin,
    boundaries, patron, incumbent, value 423. By the Editor, Cadgwith
    cove, succession of property in the parish ibid. Singular claim
    belonging to the rector, statistics, incumbent, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase, Geology of the Lizard district in the “Transactions of
    the Cornish Geological Society” 424
  Rudall, Rev. Edward, i. 111
  Rudyard, John, built the 2nd lighthouse at Eddystone, iii. 376, 377, 378
  Ruffo, Roger, iv. 27
  Rugeham, iii. 350
  Rume parish, ii. 252
  Rumor, St. iii. 384 _bis_, 459. His life 385
  Runawartha, iii. 326
  Rundle, i. 136
  Rupe de, or Roach, Ralph, iii. 393. Family 391, 392, 393
  Rupert, Prince, arrived in Cornwall, and accompanied the King, iv. 186
  Rupibus, Peter de, i. 130
  Rushes, planted as a fence against the sand, ii. 150
  Russell, John, Lord, i. 301.――Lost an eye at the siege of Montrueil,
    sent to oppose the Cornish rebels, iii. 196. Meets them 197. Rev.
    John 275. Mr. 11
  ―――― of Exeter, Mr. made a fortune by the Lisbon trade, ii. 19
  Ruthes chapel, i. 218
  Ruthven, governor of Plymouth, i. 113
  Rutland, ii. 89
  ―――― Henry, Earl of, i. 9
  Ruydacus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Ryalton manor, i. 209, 234, 246, 250――iv. 138, 139. Account of 231
  Ryalton mansion house, i. 74, 233
  Rycaut’s history, ii. 368
  Rye, Naval armaments defeated by Fowey, ii. 45
  Rysbank, i. 169
  Ryvier castle, by Leland, iv. 265

  Sabina Popeia, i. 329
  Saccombe of Trewinnow, i. 257
  Sadler, Captain, i. 270
  Saigar, iii. 331
  St. Alban’s, battle of, iii. 294
  St. Asaph, William Lloyd, Bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  Saint Aubyn. _See Seynt Aubyn_
  St. Barbe, Francis, iii. 224
  St. Clare, Sophia, a novel, iii. 34
  St. George, Clarence and Sir Richard, iii. 61
  St. John family, iii. 270
  St. Martin, Aldred de, iv. 77, 83
  St. Maur, William, ii. 189
  St. Pierre, Eustace, ii. 158
  Saints, Sieur D. T.’s Book of, i. 214
  Salamanca university, i. 311
  Salamis, iii. 216
  Salem in America, iii. 72 _ter._
  Salian Way, i. 393
  Salisbury, rebels march through, i. 87. Henry Rogers escapes to, and
    is there apprehended 269, 282
  ―――― Bishop of, John Coldwell, ii. 7. Lionel Woodvill 194
  ―――― Earl of, i. 168.――Cecil, ii. 66. Robert Cecil 213. Montacute
    91. Nevill, Richard 182. Plantagenet, Margaret, Countess 91
  ―――― plain, a nucleus of three chalky ridges, iii. 10
  Salmatius, i. 192
  Salmenica, castle of, ii. 368
  Salmon of the Alan and Val, i. 74
  Salmon, John, ii. 192
  ――――’s Survey of England, iv. 8
  Saltash, the Tamara of the Britons, iv. 40
  ―――― borough, John Lemon, M.P. for, iii. 229
  ―――― passage, iv. 185, 188
  ―――― river, i. 32
  ―――― town, i. 77, 103, 113, 203――ii. 59, 76, 79, 254――iii. 110, 380
  Salter, George, iii. 350. William of Devonshire 211, 215
  Salterne of Penheale, i. 379
  Saltren, John. iii. 276 _bis_
  Salvia cardinalis, iv. 182
  ―――― grahami, iv. 182
  ―――― involucrata, iv. 182
  Sammes’s Britannia, i. 120
  Sampford Courtenay, i. 170
  Sampson, the Jewish Hercules, iii. 280
  ―――― the younger, Archbishop of Dole, iii. 336
  ―――― Benjamin, his gunpowder manufactory and elegant residence, iii.
    305. Martin 16
  ―――― island, iv. 174. Extent of 175
  ―――― St. ii. 231. Hals’s uninteresting history of, Giant church
    dedicated to 90.――His history, iii. 281
  ―――― St. chapel, Padstow, iii. 280
  SAMPSON’S, St. or Glant parish, ii. 89 _bis_, 90 _bis_, _see Glant_
  ―――― St. de South-hill church, ii. 231
  San or Saint explained, iv. 312
  Sancred, or Sancreed parish, iii. 242,  283
  ―――― St. iii. 425
  SANCREED parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, land tax, rich lodes of tin, iii. 425. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, name ibid. A vicarage, value, patron 426. By
    the Editor, church and monuments, one to Mrs. Bird, memoir of her,
    impropriation and patronage, consecrated well, St. Euny’s chapel,
    Hals’s dissertation on Creeds ibid. Pronounced Sancrist, Drift,
    Tregonnebris, late vicar, statistics, present vicar, patron, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 427
  Sancrit, iii. 78
  Sancroft, William, Archbishop of Canterbury, committed to the tower,
    iii. 296, 299
  Sanctuary manor, iv. 17
  Sand, inundated great part of Cornwall, ii. 149. Difficulty of
    burning the calcareous to lime 150.――Encroachments of, iii. 340.
    Confined by roots of plants 344.――Important for manure, iv. 17
  ―――― place, iii. 252
  Sandal, John, i. 251
  Sander’s land, i. 187
  Sanders, Mr. iv. 74
  Sandford, i. 317
  Sandhill, account of, i. 158
  Sands, John, i. 24.――Lord, and Hester his daughter, iii. 145
  Sandwich, i. 169.――A Cinque port, ii. 38
  ―――― Edward Montagu, Earl of, iii. 104
  Sandys, Sir Edwin, Edwin Archbishop of York, arms, iii. 158.――Rev.
    William, tutor to Lord de Dunstanville, ii. 244.――Rev. William, iii.
    10, 238, 239 _bis_, 240. Called the Cardinal, monument to 239.
    William 241
  ―――― of Hedbury, Worcestershire, Margaret and Sir William, iii. 158.
    William 158, 159. Sir William 158. Family 156. The Editor, their
    heir 159. Arms 158.――Edwyn, Lord, iv. 57
  ―――― of Helston, Mary, Mr. ii. 218.――Of St. Minver, Mr. iv. 104
  ―――― of Lanarth, Rev. Sampson, William, ii. 327
  ―――― of Ombersley, ii. 327
  ―――― of the Vine, Basingstoke, Hants, Edwin, iii. 159. Elizabeth
    158. Henry 157 _quat._, 158 _ter._, 158, 159. Hester 157 _ter._, 158
    _ter._, 159 _bis_. Margaret, William Lord 158.――Edwyn, Lord, raised
    a regiment of foot, and another of horse for Charles 1st, his death,
    iv. 58. William Lord 57 _bis_
  ―――― of the Vine peerage, petition for, iv. 58
  Saneret parish, ii. 282
  Sanns, John and Sampson, ii. 320
  Sans, word explained, iv. 317
  Santy, Edmund, iii. 324
  Saplyn, William, i. 215 _bis_
  Saracens, i. 414――ii. 37
  Sarah, i. 414
  Sargeaux of Court, family, ii. 394, 395. Alice 395 _bis_. Richard
    394 _ter._ Richard, jun. and Richard Sheriff of Cornwall 394. Sir
    Richard, ib. _ter._ Arms 395
  Sarum, borough, ii. 162.――Old, burgage tenures purchased by governor
    Pitt, and his election for, i. 68
  “Satyrs of Juvenal and Persius,” notes on, iv. 87
  Saunder’s hill, iii. 280
  Saviour’s, St. chapel, Padstow, iii. 281
  Sawah, iii. 33
  Sawle, Joseph, i. 43――iii. 200――Family, iv. 101
  ―――― of Penrice, Joseph and Mary, i. 222.――Mr. iii. 279
  Saxifraga sarmentosa, iv. 182
  Saxon camp, iv. 78
  ―――― Chronicle, ii. 403――iii. 310
  ―――― fort, iii. 322
  ―――― kings, tradition of seven dining together, ii. 284
  ―――― saint, iv. 125
  ―――― times, iii. 264
  ―――― victory at Camelford, iii. 322
  Saxons, i. 195, 305, 334 _quat._, 326, 337 _bis_, 338, 342 _bis_,
    404――ii. 127――iii. 284, 365 _bis_.――Landed at Perthsasnac, ii. 165.
    Their castles 423. Battle with the Britons 403.――Defeated by St.
    David, iii. 293.――Their settlement in Cornwall, iv. 125
  Say, William, Lord, ii. 379
  Sayer family, iii. 212, 215
  Scandinavians, i. 341――ii. 248
  Scawen, i. 392.――Family, ii. 67. Arms 68.――Thomas, iii. 318, 319.
    Sir William 268, 271, 317. Mr. 271, 355. William, his observations
    on the Cornish MS. Passio Christi, App. V. iv. 190. His dissertation
    on the Cornish tongue 193 to 221
  ―――― of Millinike, William, ii. 67
  Scawn, i. 20
  Schobells, ii. 281
  Sciffo, Phavorino and Hortulana, i. 175
  Scilly Islands or Isles, i. 139, 198, 199――ii. 213, 237, 283
    _ter._――iii. 429, 430 _bis_, 431, 433.――Governor and gunners
    pensioned, ii. 278. Sir John Grenville, governor 345. Lighthouse on
    St. Agnes 358.――Etymology, iii. 430 _bis_. Reduced by Athelstan 322.
    Garrison at 289.――List of, iv. 230
  SCILLY ISLANDS, by the Editor, unnoticed by Hals and Tonkin,
    frequented by the ancients for tin, called the ancient
    Cassiterides by mistake, fable of the Lioness country, exaggerated
    opinion of the ancients, Scilly isles mistaken by them for
    England, iv. 168. Monastery, grant to Tavistock abbey and its
    confirmation 169. A second 170. Letter from Edward 3rd, his camp
    in Enmoor, only two monks resident, agreement for their exchange
    for secular priests, tithes impropriated, St. Nicholas convent on
    Trescow island, remains visible, St. Nicholas the patron of
    mariners 171; and of infants, miracle working by his relics, the
    islands important in the Civil Wars, patriotism of the cavaliers,
    system of annual leasing injurious to the islands 172. Now let on
    lives with condition of improving the harbour, expectations formed
    from Mr. Smith, Lighthouse on St. Agnes, suggestion for one on the
    Wolf 173. Wrecks formerly much more frequent than now, loss of the
    Victory, Geology, rocks insignificant, no legendary history or
    peculiarity of manners, their names, speculations upon them 174.
    Vigilance in the customs, produce, resort of ships, Dr. Borlase on
    their druidical antiquities, population, improvement of police and
    justice 175. Appointment of magistrates, situation of St. Agnes
    lighthouse, high water 176
  Scipio Africanus, iii. 106.――His remark on the fall of Carthage, ii. 426
  Scobell, i. 45 _bis_, 46, 255. Barbara 259 _bis_. Francis 44, 417,
    418. Francis, M.P., 416. Mary 259. Richard 44, 259 _bis_. Arms
    44.――Francis, iii. 381. Mr. and family 88
  ―――― of Menagwins, Mary and Richard, i. 257.――In St. Austell, ii.
    217 _bis_
  ―――― of Rosillian, Henry, i. 53
  ―――― of St. Austell, i. 53
  Scobhall of Devon, arms, i. 44
  Scornier, account of, ii. 134
  Scotland, i. 336――iv. 75.――Union with, i. 126.――St. German travelled
    through and preached there, ii. 65. The Eliots originated from 66.
    The Duke of Braciano came to 371
  ―――― church of, iii. 300
  Scots, King, ii. 371
  ―――― wars, iv. 75
  Scott, Sir Walter, a quotation from, ii. 214. He has given
    popularity to the word foray 165
  Scottish tongue, iii. 114
  Scripture, Jewish, contains no reference to a future existence, book
    of Job excepted, iii. 69
  Scrope, Elizabeth and Sir Richard, ii. 185.――Richard and William,
    Lords of Bolton castle, iii. 129. Arms ibid. 130. Their contest with
    Carmynow for them 129
  Scrope and Grosvenor Roll, iii. 138
  Scylley Isles, by Leland, iv. 266, 285
  Sea trout, iii. 442
  Seaborn, Anne and Mr. of Bristol, ii. 270
  Seaford, relics at, iii. 33
  Seaforth, i. 47
  Searell, Allen, i. 2
  Searle family and arms, i. 37.――Mr. iv. 98
  Seaton river, iii. 118, 119
  Seawen, i. 397
  Sebaste, i. 52
  Sebert, King of the East Angles, ii. 284
  Seccombe of Pelsew, William, and arms, i. 417
  Sechell, Rev. Mr. of St. Just and Sancreed, iii. 427
  Segar, William, ii. 192
  Selborne, and its vicar, Mr. White, iii. 206
  Selby abbey, ii. 75
  Selybria in Greece, ii. 366
  Senan, St. an Irishman, his life by Dr. Butler, friend of St. David,
    founded a monastery, was a bishop, died the same day as St. David,
    notice of him, iii. 431. His day 431, and 434
  Senate of Rome, i. 334
  Seneca, iv. 87
  Seneschale family, ii. 139
  ―――― of Holland, Bernard, John de, and Luke, ii. 93
  Sennan, St. a Persian, exposed to wild beasts, and at last killed by
    gladiators, iii. 434
  ―――― St. parish, i. 198――ii. 282
  Sennen, Sennon or Sennor parish, i. 138, 139――iii. 30, 78
  SENNEN parish, or ST. SENNEN, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    ancient name, value, land tax, painted images hid in the wall,
    inscription on font, iii. 428. Penros, Trevear, parish yields
    little wheat, but plenty of barley, Chapel Carne Braye 429.
    Dangerous rocks, spire thrown down, erected by the Romans, or by
    King Athelstan, and Marogeth Arvowed 430. Penryn-Penwid, Land’s
    End 431. By Tonkin, St. Sennan, daughter church to Burian. By the
    Editor, most western parish in England ibid. No granite on the
    cliff except near Land’s End, magnificent scene, Longships,
    light-house upon, communication interrupted sometimes for three
    months, latitude and longitude of Land’s End, church conspicuous,
    built of granite, monuments, inn 432. Its appropriate
    inscriptions, Mean village, tradition and prophecy attached to a
    flat rock here, Whitsand bay, things said to have landed here,
    parish fertile, variety of measures, difference of the mile in
    England and Ireland 433. English and Irish acre, history of St.
    Sennen, another St. Senan, his Life by Dr. Butler 434. Parish
    feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, sand in Whitsand bay,
    drifted as far as Sennen green 435
  Senns, i. 214
  Sepulchre of our Saviour, ii. 414
  Sereod, Sir Thomas, M.P. for Cornwall, iii. 165
  Sergeaulx, Sir Richard and his heirs, iii. 65.――Richard, iv. 21 and
    22. Sir Richard and three Misses 22. Family 21
  Sergiopolis, iv. 100
  Sergius, St. iv. 111. His history, the place of his martyrdom named
    Sergiopolis 100
  ―――― and Bacchus, Saints, Abbey at Angiers, iii. 232 _bis_――iv. 100, 105
  Sergreaulx, i. 264. Alice 262 _quat._ Richard 264. Sir Richard
    262.――Sir Richard, ii. 181. Family ibid. 182
  Serischall, Bartholomew, Margery and arms, iii. 225
  Seriseaux, Richard de, ii. 398
  ―――― arms, iii. 225
  Serjeant, Rev. John, i. 381
  Serjeaux family, iii. 258
  Serman, St. iv. 14
  Serpeknol, iv. 153
  Serpents, petrified, invariably wanted a head, ii. 298
  Sescombe of St. Kevorne, i. 313
  Seven Oaks, Kent, iv. 87 _bis_
  Seven years’ war, ii. 32, 245
  Severn channel, iv. 15
  ―――― river, iii. 298
  ―――― sea, iii. 331
  Seville, i. 161
  ―――― Bishop of, i. 82
  Seviock, iii. 374
  Seymour, Lord Hugh, cruised from Falmouth, ii. 18
  ―――― Charles Duke of Somerset, and Lady Elizabeth 460. Colonel H.
    iii. 231.――Edward, Duke of Somerset and protector, iv. 107
  ―――― of Bury Pomeroye, Sir Edward, i. 416
  Seyne fishing for pilchards, ii. 262
  Seyntaubyn, or Seynt Aubyn, i. 136, 261, 317, 318, 319, 414. Mr.
    265. Sir John, Bart. 121, 261 _bis_, 266 _ter._, 268, 271, 277, 350,
    417, 418. His address to the parish of Crowan on the outrage at
    Skewis 284. Charity schools endowed by 288. Thomas 261. Family
    monuments in Crowan church 288――ii. 160 _bis_. Ann 5. Catherine 199.
    Geoffrey, Sheriff of Cornwall, Sir Guy 181, 183, 395. John 213,
    _quin._, 354. Sir John 5, 176, 199 _bis_, 213, 214, 243. Margaret
    243. Margery 354.――St. Aubin, or St. Aubyn, Francis, iii. 80. John
    83. Rev. R. T. of Ruan Minor 424. Miss 133. Mr. a pupil of Dr.
    Borlase 53.――Sir John, iv. 73, 139. Mr. 22. Family 107
  ―――― of Clanawar, Colonel John, i. 113
  ―――― of Clowance, i. 261, 262, 263. Geoffrey 265. Sir Guy 261, 262,
    263, 265. John 262 _bis_. Sir John 262 _ter._, 263, 265. Thomas 262
    _bis_. Arms 262.――Geoffrey, ii. 385. John 122.――John, iii. 81, 317.
    Sir John 317, 318, 319. Thomas 211. Mr. 65.――Of Clowans, Colonel
    John, iv. 188
  ―――― of Crowan, i. 360
  ―――― of Trekininge, Sir John, i. 216
  Shaftesbury, ii. 26
  ―――― Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl of, ii. 379
  Shakespeare, iv. 119
  Shakspeare of Pendarves, John, iii. 311
  Shannon river, iii. 434
  Shapcott, of Elton, Thomas, i. 170
  Shapter, Rev. Mr. ii. 106
  Sharp Tor, or Sharpy Torry, i. 189, _ter._――iii. 45.――Description
    of, i. 187
  Sheen Priory, Richmond, ii. 190
  Sheepshanks, Rev. Mr. ii. 105. His character 104
  Shell work, extraordinary, i. 147
  Shepard, Elizabeth, i. 222
  Shepherds, iii. 273. Origin of the name 272
  Sherborne manor, ii. 7
  Sheriff of Cornwall violently resisted in the execution of his duty
    by Henry Rogers at Skewis, i. 268
  ―――― Thady, iv. 116
  Sheviock barton, iii. 436
  ―――― manor, ii. 362――iii. 437
  ―――― parish, i. 32――ii. 250. Or Shevyock 59
  SHEVIOCK parish, by Hals, situation and boundaries, value of
    benefice, land tax, endowment of the church, Dawnay family, iii.
    436. By Tonkin, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, Sheviock manor
    437. By the Editor, church old, splendid monuments 438. Tale of the
    building of the church and a barn, advowson, Crofthole village, its
    situation, Porth Wrinkle 439. Trethel, statistics, rector, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 440
  Shillingham, iii. 464. Account of 463
  ―――― of Shillingham family, iii. 463
  Shipmoney, iii. 144 _bis_, 152
  Shipwreck, extraordinary, ii. 320
  Shoreham, i. 258
  Short, Charles, of Devon, ii. 218
  Shovel, Sir Cloudesley, iv. 174
  Shrewsbury, ii. 76. St. Chad, patron of 391
  ―――― Richard of, i. 88
  Shropshire, the Cornwalls twenty-two times sheriffs of, iii. 449
  Shuckburgh, Richard, i. 355.――Sir George. His Tables, iv. 145
  ―――― of Shuckburgh, i. 355
  Sibthorpe, i. 358
  Sibthorpia Europæa, iv. 180
  Siddenham, South, ii. 430
  Sidenham, Cuthbert and Humphrey, iv. 77
  Sidney, Sir Philip, Sir Beville Grenville was his rival, ii. 348
  Sigdon, ii. 71
  Sigebert, King of the East Angles, ii. 284
  Signals, from Maker church, iii. 106. Remarks on ibid.
  Silly, William, i. 223.――Mrs. ii. 136.――Elizabeth and Joseph, iii. 66
  ―――― of Minver and St. Wenn, John, iii. 237. Family 66. Arms 237
  ―――― of Trevella, Hender, iii. 237. William 237, 238
  Sillye, heir of, iv. 111
  Siloam, tower of, iii. 422
  Silvester, Pope, i. 237
  Simmons, George, iii. 215
  Simon’s, St. and St. Jude’s day, ii. 140
  Simon Ward or St. Breward parish, i. 62, 131――iv. 97
  Simpson, John, iii. 206
  Sion Abbey, ii. 176. Middlesex 209, 212 _bis_
  Sirius, its parallax ascertained by Dr. Maskelyne, ii. 222
  Sisters, the nine, iv. 2
  Sithian, St. Bertin, Abbot of, iv. 157
  Sithney parish, ii. 136, 141, 155, 156, 160. St. John’s hospital at
    157――iii. 419, 421.――Its governor, iv. 1.――Near Helston, singular
    tale of a fair removed from, iii. 309
  SITHNEY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, land tax, St. John’s
    hospital, a deficiency in the MS. iii. 441. Trout, royalty of the
    river, Trevelle’s tenure 442. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name
    ibid. A vicarage, value, patron, incumbent, impropriation, Penrose
    manor, its situation, Loo Pool, its trout, sandbank, used as a
    bridge, its danger, Mr. Penrose’s house, name of the river 443. The
    bar, the fish of the pool 444. By the Editor, distance of the church
    from Breage church, divided by a valley, attempt to make a harbour
    of Porthleaven ibid. Has failed, Penrose, improvements expected,
    Antron 445. Trevarnoe, St. John’s hospital, stone pointing out its
    site, impropriation of the tithes, present and a former incumbent
    446. Parish feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, form of the
    parish, Whele Vor 447
  Sixtus 5th, Pope, ii. 371 _bis_
  Skelton, ii. 186
  Skewish, Great, iv. 141
  ―――― Miss, iii. 147.――Collan and family, iv. 2
  Skewys, i. 267 _bis_, 272, 303
  ―――― of Skewys, John, i. 303
  Skidmore, Thomas, ii. 196
  Skinden, account of, ii. 338
  Skippon, Major General, i. 114 _bis_――iv. 188. His men distressed on
    their march, and charged by the King’s troops ibid. Commissioner for
    the parliament army 189
  Skyburiow, Miss, iii. 134
  Slade of Lanewa, George, i. 418
  ―――― of Trevennen, Simon, iii. 202 _bis_, and William 202
  Slancombe Dawney, i. 64
  Slannen, i. 347, 370
  Slanning, Sir Nicholas of Marstow, Devon, governor of Pendennis
    castle. Killed at the battle of Bristol against the rebels, and the
    marriage of his widow, ii. 13.――Sir Nicholas, Bart. iii. 76. Sir
    Nicholas of Marystow, Devon 75, 76. Arms 76
  Slapton, college of, Devon, iii. 352
  Slate from Drillavale quarry, the best in England, iv. 45
  Sloane’s, Sir Hans, MSS. iii. 154
  Slugg, John, ii. 189
  Small, i. 317
  Smeaton, Mr. ii. 264. Built the present Eddystone lighthouse 378
    _quat._, 432
  Smith, i. 78, 117.――Walter, ii. 70.――William, Bishop of Litchfield,
    afterwards of Lincoln, iii. 141――i. 218.――Mr. has taken a lease of
    the Scilly isles, iv. 173. Name 128
  ―――― of Crantock, Sir James, i. 250. Sir William 249. Arms 250
  ―――― of Devon, George and Grace, ii. 347
  ―――― of Exon, i. 250. Sir James 348
  ―――― of Kent, John, ii. 379
  ―――― of Mitchell Morton family, ii. 416
  ―――― of Trelizicke, i. 348
  ―――― of Trethewoll, i. 408
  ――――’s, ii. 154
  Smithfield, execution in, ii. 192
  Smithick or Smithike, British name of Falmouth, ii. 20. Changed 8.
    Town and custom-house built 9
  Smithson, Sir Hugh, Duke of Northumberland, iii. 460
  Smyrna, iii. 187.――Rev. E. Nankivell, chaplain to the factory at,
    iv. 5
  Smyth, Rev. T. S. i. 49.――Rev. John, curate of St. Just, notice of,
    ii. 286. Monument, inscription, and cenotaph 287
  Snell, Rev. Mr. of Menheniot, iii. 168
  ―――― of Whilley, Elizabeth, iii. 160
  Soaprock, account of, ii. 360
  Sobieski, John, the preserver of Christendom, ii. 351
  Society, Antiquarian, ii. 224
  ―――― for propagating the Gospel, iii. 73
  ―――― Royal, ii. 224
  Solenny, Hostulus De, iv. 25, 26 _quat._ John 26 _ter._
  Solinus, i. 199
  Solomon, Duke of Cornwall, i. 294
  Somaster of Painsford, Devon, John and Marianne, ii. 304
  Somers, Lord, iii. 15
  Somerset, Duke of, i. 169 _quat._――ii. 182.――Charles Seymour, iii.
    460. John 65.――Edward Seymour, Protector, iv. 107
  Somersetshire, i. 113――ii. 110, 190, 293. Romantic scenery of
    88.――Insurgents enter, i. 86.――King Charles in, marched out of, iv.
    185. The Trevelyans sheriffs of 114
  Sondry, Thomas, iii. 387
  Sophocles, ii. 103, 165
  Sound, the English fleet sailed for, ii. 27
  South Downs, iii. 10
  ―――― Saxons, Cissa, King of, ii. 284
  ―――― Sea islands, iv. 45
  Southallington manor, i. 64
  Southampton, ii. 76
  Southernay, i. 108
  Southey’s lines upon St. Keyne’s well, ii. 295
  Southill parish, i. 151 _bis_――ii. 309 _bis_――iii. 43――iv. 6, 7
  SOUTHILL parish. See _Hill, South_
  South Teign, i. 170
  Sowle, i. 47
  Spain, i. 161 _ter._――ii. 107――iii. 187, 361――iv. 86.――Coast of,
    iii. 218.――Tobacco sold cheap in, ii. 43. War with 245. Her fleet
    ibid. Appeared in Plymouth Sound 246. Officers lost returning from
    325.――Elizabeth’s wars with, iii. 105.――Trade of Looe with, iv. 35
  Spaniards, ii. 6.――Invasion of Britain by, their name hated at
    Mousehole, iii. 287.――And French, sea-fight with, iv. 21
  Spanish galleons, Sir Richard Grenville sent in the Revenge to
    intercept, ii. 344
  ―――― galleys, five, burnt Penzance, iii. 81, 91
  ―――― merchants murdered, ii. 6
  ―――― pieces, ii. 6
  ―――― vessel wrecked, iii. 311
  ―――― wars, story of, ii. 6
  Spark of Plymouth, i. 370
  Sparks family, ii. 357
  Speaker of the House of Commons, ii. 68.――Speakers, Hakewell’s
    Catalogue of, iv. 44
  Speccott, i. 221. Sir John 381 _bis_. Arms 379.――Family, ii. 398,
    400.――Mr. iii. 449. His death 450
  ―――― of Penheale, John, i. 378 _bis_. Hon. John 378, 379. Seized
    with small pox the day after his marriage 379. His death and will
    ibid.――John and Colonel, ii. 399.――Of Penheel, John, iii. 38
  Speed, i. 217――iii. 111, 441――iv. 101; and Dugdale’s Monast. Anglic.
    i. 247――ii. 62, 96――iv. 101
  Spelman’s Glossary, iii. 389
  Spencer of Lancaster, i. 263
  Spernon, i. 127
  Sperrack of Trigantan, i. 258
  Spettigue, Rev. Edward of Michaelstow, iii. 223.――John, iv. 62
  Spigurnel, Henry, iii. 2
  Spinster’s town, iv. 140
  Spour family, ii. 227, 229. Henry, Miss, and arms 227
  Spoure of Trebartha, Edmund, and Mary, ii. 396.――Family, i. 302, 303
  Spry, Edward, iii. 378. Sir. J. T. and Admiral 446. Miss 66. Family
    194, 449. Line upon 449
  ―――― or Sprye of Tregony, Peter and his daughter, iii. 77. Miss 75
  Sprye, A. G. i. 28. Rev. William 106. Arms and etymology of name
    28.――Samuel Thomas, M.P. for Bodmin, ii. 35. Admiral 34.――Family, i.
    29, 61 _ter._――ii. 54, 300
  ―――― of Blissland, i. 28
  Spur, Mr. ii. 120
  Spye, derivation of name, i. 28
  Squire, Arthur, ii. 377
  Stabback, Rev. Thomas, i. 293.――Rev. Samuel of Sancreed, iii. 427
  Stackenoe, iv. 1
  Stackhouse, Mrs. i. 400. Edward William 401. Rev. Thomas, author of
    the History of the Bible 400. John 163 _ter._, 400 _bis_. William
    400. Dr. William 163, 400 _bis_.――John, iii. 367 _bis_. Thomas of
    Beenham, Berks 366. His works ibid. Rev. Dr. William, rector of St.
    Erme ibid. _bis_. William 367 _bis_
  Stadyon, ii. 139
  Stafford, Baron of, ii. 230. Baronial family 231
  ―――― county, ii. 89
  ―――― Humphrey, i. 64.――Edmund, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 446. Family 117
  Stainton, Henry De, iii. 2
  Stamford, Earl of, governor of Plymouth, iii. 183. Defeated 351
  ―――― hill, iii. 351
  ―――― creek, iii. 256
  Stanbury, iii. 255
  ―――― family, iii. 350
  ―――― of Stanbury, Richard or John, Bishop of Hereford, family and
    their property, iii. 255
  Stancomb Dawney, iii. 436
  Stanhope, i. 61. Hon. and Rev. H., 149
  Stannaries, laws relating to, i. 365.――Records of, iii. 57.――Earl of
    Radnor, Lord Warden of, ii. 380.――John Thomas, Vice Warden of, iv. 91
  Starford, William, i. 108
  Stawel, Edward Lord, H. B. Legge, Lord, H. S. B. Legge, Lord, and
    Mary, iii. 206
  Stawell, John, ii. 196
  Steam boats, discovery anticipated, iv. 91
  ―――― engine, the first used in Cornwall, i. 127
  Stebens, Rev. R. S. of South Petherwin, iii. 338
  Stephen, King, ii. 87――iii. 433, 456 _bis_, 463――iv. 81, 82, 140
  ―――― prior of Launceston, ii. 419
  ―――― St. the protomartyr, iii. 450, 456
  ―――― St. by Leland, iv. 292
  ―――― St. cum Tresmore, ii. 430
  ―――― ’s, St. abbey, dissolution of, iv. 68
  ―――― St. altar in Dublin cathedral, iv. 146
  ―――― St. chapel in Dublin cathedral, iv. 147
  ―――― St. church, iii. 458
  ―――― St. college, by Launceston, i. 112――iv. 185.――Prior of, i. 378
    _bis_
  ―――― St. collegiate church, suppressed, ii. 419. Ralph, Dean of 426.
    Prior of 422
  ―――― St. parish, i. 103, 128, 140, 251, 310――iii. 195, 207, 335, 354
    _bis_, 395――iv. 152
  Stephen’s, St. by Leland, iv. 281
  ―――― St. in Brannel church, iii. 198. The advowson 202
  ――――’s St. in Brannel or Branwell parish, i. 310――ii. 109, 110,
    353――iv. 54
  STEPHEN’S, ST. in BRANNEL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, consolidation with St. Denis, and Carhayes,
    endowment, patron, incumbent, land tax, court, iii. 448. Bodenike,
    the love adventures of Mr. Tanner and Mrs. Windham 449. By Tonkin,
    situation and boundaries, dedication, daughter to Carhayes, value,
    patron, incumbent 450. Manor of Brannel 451. Whitaker, singular
    constitution of the parish, manor of Carhayes supposed a royal one
    451. Name and appearance of the house confirm the supposition 452.
    St. Denis parochiated, Carhayes not mentioned in Pope Nicholas’s
    valor 453. By Editor, church stands high, lofty tower, potatoe
    cultivation, monument in church to Dr. Hugh Wolrige with epitaph,
    statistics, fluctuation in mining, china clay, Geology by Dr. Boase
    454. China stone and clay, quantities exported from Cornwall 455
  ―――― St. by Launceston parish, ii. 361, 417, 419, 420――iii. 466
  STEPHEN’S, ST. near LAUNCESTON parish, by Hals, situation,
    boundaries, collegiate church, converted into a priory, iii. 456.
    Impropriated all the benefices annexed to it, land tax, fairs, a
    friary 457. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, value of benefice 457.
    By Editor, early history indistinct, college changed into a
    monastery, St. Thomas’s church, etymology of Launceston, the church
    seated high with a lofty tower, inscription to Viscount Newhaven,
    Sir Jonathan Phillips 458. Barton of Carnedon, modern history of the
    parish, borough of Newport, its constitution, Werrington 459. Its
    deer park 460. Fairs, Sarah Coat, aged 104. Statistics, incumbent,
    Geology by Dr.Boase 461
  ――――’s, St. by Launceston, prior of, iv. 51, 59, 63 _bis_, 68
  ―――― St. in Lesnewith, iv. 63
  ―――― St. in Penwith, iv. 50, 51 _quat._
  ―――― St. by Saltash parish, i. 199, 203――ii. 8, 110.――Sheet of
    Hals’s MS. relating to, communicated to the Editor, iv. 184
  STEPHEN’S, ST. near SALTASH, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    iii. 461. Ancient name, value of benefice, castle, honour, and
    manor, of Trematon, their history 462. Shillingham, etymology,
    Buller family, treachery of a domestic chaplain 463. Fentongollan
    reluctantly sold to raise the amount of a fine 464. Earth,
    Wyvillecomb 465. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, a vicarge, its
    value, &c. ibid. By the Editor 466. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 470
  ―――― St. point, i. 381, 386
  ―――― St. rectory, i. 72
  Stephens family, i. 84 _bis_, 121 _bis_――ii. 43, 77, 80, 269――iv.
    67.――Rev. Edward, ii. 338. Samuel 215. Mr. 134, 259.――Rev. Darell,
    of Little Petherick, iii. 335. Rev. D. of Maker 109. John 48, 387.
    Rev. Mr. 240. Mrs. 8.――Nicholas, iv. 77
  ―――― of Culverhouse near Exeter, Richard, iv. 67
  ―――― of St. Ives, John, i. 353, 354, 392, 399 _bis_, 403. Samuel
    403.――Family escaped the plague, ii. 271. Anne, Augustus, Harriet
    270. John 269 _ter._, 270 _bis_, Maria 270. Samuel 270 _quin._
  ―――― of Tregenna, Samuel, i. 392, 403.――Mr. ii. 354.――In St. Ives,
    Rev. J. iii. 54. Samuel 440
  ―――― of Tregorne, Mr. iii. 311
  Stepney, iii. 188
  Stepper point, iii. 281, 282
  Sternhold, Thomas, i. 96――iii. 238
  Stevens family, iii. 192
  Steward, Lord, ii. 68
  Stidio, Bishop of Cornwall, ii. 60, 61――iii. 415
  Stithian parish, i. 221, 236.――Stithians, ii. 129, 140.――Stithyans
    or St. Stithians, iii. 59, 305, 380
  ―――― St. iv. 2
  ――――’s St. church, iv. 4
  STITHIAN’S, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient
    name, mother church to Peranwell, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, impropriation, saint, iv. 1. Penaluricke
    barton and manor, Tretheage, the nine maids, tin 2. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, saint, a vicarage ibid. Patron,
    impropriation, incumbent, manor of Tretheage 3. By Editor, church
    and tower, manors of Kennal and Roseeth, barton of Tretheage ibid.
    Penalurick, Treweek, Tresavren, Trevales, the church, charter of
    Edmund Earl of Cornwall 4. Value of the benefice, late vicar,
    statistics, present vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 5
  Stithiany, ii. 136
  Stock, D. J. E. his Life of Dr. Beddoes, iii. 251
  Stoke, i. 266.――Meaning of, iv. 7
  ―――― Climsland, i. 151, 153 _bis_――ii. 229, 230, 309――iii. 40, 43
  ―――― Climsland, or Stow Climsland manor, iv. 6, 7, 11
  STOKE CLIMSLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, manor, writ,
    Hengiston downs, tin works, part of Cari Bollock, iv. 6. Manor of
    Rileaton, writ, benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax. By Tonkin and
    Whitaker, situation and boundaries, value, patron, incumbent, manor
    of Climsland 7. Cary Bullock park, etymology 8. By the Editor, manor
    of Stoke Climsland, and Climsland prior, Carybullock, Whiteford, Mr.
    Call, memoir of 9. Afterwards Sir John, Sir W. P. Call, manor of
    Climsland prior, advowson 11. Statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 12
  ―――― Damerel, i. 266
  ―――― Damerell parish, iv. 39
  ―――― Gabriel church, i. 367
  ―――― Gabriel vicarage, i. 130
  Stone, advowson, iii. 115
  ―――― of Bundbury, Wilts, James, i. 259
  Stonehouse, west, now Mount Edgecombe, iii. 107
  Stones, circles of, i. 141
  Storm which destroyed Eddystone lighthouse, iii. 376.――At Gwenap,
    ii. 132
  Stourton, Lord, iii. 357. His daughter 369
  Stow’s History of England, iii. 310
  Stowe, in Bucks, carvings from Stowe in Cornwall, transferred to,
    ii. 346, 351
  ―――― in Kilkhampton, ii. 340. Etymology 232. The Grenvilles resided
    there for many generations 344. Mansion built by John, Earl of Bath
    346, 351. The noblest house in the west of England 346. Demolished,
    materials sold, wainscot of the chapel sold to Lord Cobham, and
    transferred to Stowe, Bucks 346, 351. Magnificence and situation
    346. The carving of the chapel by Mr. Chuke, ib. Built at the
    national expence, almost all the gentlemen’s seats in Cornwall
    embellished from 351.――Staircase from, iii. 279. Spoils of 351
  Stowell, Sir John, ii. 233.――William, iii. 358
  Stradling, Ann, iii. 316. Edmund 316 _bis_
  ―――― of Dunlevy, Edmund, iii. 211
  Strange, Nicholas, i. 246
  Strathan, or Stratton hundred, iii. 22, 114, 254, 349
  Straton, i. 60
  Stratone, iv. 1
  Stratton hundred, i. 133――ii. 232 340, 402, 413――iv. 12, 15, 39, 40,
    131, 152 _bis_.――Bailiffry of, ii. 416
  ―――― manor, ii. 427――iv. 15, 16 _bis_
  ―――― parish, ii. 273, 340, 413, 416, 429, 430――iii. 114, 274, 349,
    352. Roman road through 324.――Battle at, ii. 349.――Victory, i. 113
  STRATTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    iv. 12. Patron, land tax, market, Thurlebere, battle in the
    rebellion, Sir B. Grenville unhorsed 13. Chudleigh taken prisoner,
    royal party victorious, with a loss of 200, took 17 guns, subsequent
    fertility of the field, Sir Ralph Hopton and his ancestry 14. By
    Tonkin, situation, boundaries, Roman way, value of benefice, a
    vicarage, patron, manor 15. Its value 16. By Editor, former road
    through Stratton and Binomy manors, manor of Efford, church and
    tower ibid. Great age of Elizabeth Cornish, the tithes, manor of
    Sanctuary changed for the honour of Wallingford, Bude, jetty, canal
    efficacy of shell-sand as manure, boats used with wheels, Fulton’s
    improvement of canal navigation 17. A watering place, Launcells
    house, G. B. Kingdon, Esq. instance of longevity, bells, height of
    Hennacleve cliff 18. Statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 19
  Straughan, Colonel, challenged the King’s army, his troop led by
    himself, iv. 186. Challenge accepted, his orders, and charge, took
    some of the King’s horses 187
  Street, John, accomplice with Rogers, convicted and executed, i.
    269. His trial for the murder of Carpenter 272. For that of Woolston 276
  ―――― Nowan, iii. 288
  Stretch of Devon, Lord of Pinhoe, iv. 43
  Strettoun, by Leland, iv. 258
  Stribble hill, i. 223
  Strode, Richard, ii. 231
  Stroote, i. 348
  Stukeley, i 141
  Styria, iii. 186
  Subterranean vault at Trove, i. 143
  “Sudeley Castle, History of,” iii. 160
  Suffolk, ii. 66
  ―――― Duke of, iv. 107.――Henry Grey, ii. 294 _bis_
  ―――― Earl of, iii. 154.――Edmund de la Pole, i. 86
  Sulpicius, St. iii. 122
  Sumaster, ii. 71
  Summercourt, i. 388 _bis_
  Sunderland, Earl of, i. 84 _bis_, 126. Charles Spencer 127
  ―――― man of war, ii. 32――iii. 186
  Surat, ii. 227――iii. 188
  Surrey, iii. 10
  ―――― Thomas Holland, Duke of, iii. 27
  Surrius’s book, i. 214
  Surtecote, Angero de, iv. 27
  Survey of Cornwall, iii. 437――iv. 68, 100, 139, 156. Of the Duchy of
    Cornwall 6
  Sussex county, iii. 206 _bis_. Weald of 10
  Sutherland, i. 349, 350, 359
  Sutton, Rev. Henry, ii. 409.――Rev. William of St. Michael Carhayes,
    and St. Stephen’s in Brannel, iii. 450
  Swallock, i. 131
  Swannacot manor, iv. 136
  Swanpool, i. 137, 138
  Swansea, i. 364――ii. 241
  ―――― coal sent to Cornwall, iii. 340
  Sweden, King of, ii. 27. Bestows medals on English officers ibid.
  Sweet, i. 417.――Rev. Charles, iii. 38
  ―――― of Kentisbury, Rev. Charles 381
  Swift, Jonathan, Dean of St. Patrick’s, i. 58.――Restored Archbishop
    Tregury’s tomb, iv. 141, 144, 147
  Swimmer, Robert, ii. 70
  Swiss cantons, had a custom of trying after execution, iii. 186
  Swithin, St. ii. 403
  Switzerland, iii. 231
  Sydemon, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Sydenham, Devon, iii. 126
  Sydney Sussex college, Cambridge, iv. 136 _bis_
  Sylea island, iv. 230
  Symmonds, Rev. John, ii. 116
  Symonds, Rev. Mr. i. 353, 354
  Symons, William, i. 105, 107.――Rev. Mr. ii. 116.――Rev. J. T. of
    Trevalga, iv. 67. Family 62
  ―――― of Halt, i. 162
  Symonward, iv. 49
  Symphorian, two saints of the name, iv. 117, 120
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 258
  Symphrogia, St. iv. 117
  Syriac, St. iv. 111, 112
  Syrian castles, ii. 423
  Sythany, i. 261
  Sythney, hospital of the Knights of St. John at, iii. 78
  Syth’s, St. ii. 405

  “Tables of the Greek Language,” iv. 87
  Tacabere, i. 133, 134 _bis_
  Tacitus, i. 256――iii. 162
  Tagus, i. 372
  Talbot, William, iv. 28. Family 145
  Talcare, i. 20――iv. 24
  Talgrogan, i. 17
  Talland, ii. 430 _bis_. Tallant 398. Talland, Tallant, or Tallend
    parish, iii. 65, 249, 291, 294
  TALLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    land tax, etymology, iv. 19. West Looe, borough and town 20.
    Killygarth barton and manor 21. Hendarsike 22. Trenake 23. By
    Tonkin and Whitaker, situation, boundaries, a vicarage, value,
    impropriation, patron, incumbent, Polpera ibid. Porth Tallant,
    manor, etymology, the church, story of Mr. Murth and his French
    miller 24. By the Editor, additions from Bond relating to West
    Looe, in the hamlet of Lemain, barton of Port Looe, Lammana,
    description of the chapel 25. Grants relating to the monastery 26,
    27. Midmain rock, Horestone rock, Portnadle bay, corporation of
    West Looe 28. West Looe down, Giant’s hedge, St. Winnow down 29.
    Romans directed their roads to Fords, Causey from Leskeard to Looe
    30. Two circular encampments, described, Berry park 31. Prospects,
    five barrows, grave discovered, a celt found 32. Some in the
    British Museum, gold chain and brass instruments found, Polvellan
    33. Inclosure of the down desirable 34. Property in it, lettings
    35. Trade of Looe, church, Beville monument, Polbenro, beauty of
    the road from Fowey to Looe, Killigarth manor, Kilmenawth, or
    Kelmenorth, hamlet of Lemaine, extract from an old record 36.
    Portlooe, Looe island, Polvellan, Greek inscription, Admiral Wager
    37. Killygarth, Polperro, advowson, statistics, incumbent,
    impropriation, Geology by Dr. Boase 38
  Talland town, iv. 36
  Tallard, Marshall, ii. 307 _bis_
  Tallat, Captain, iii. 187
  Talmeneth, by Leland, iv. 264
  Tamalanc, i. 2
  Tamar river, i. 107, 113, 133 _bis_, 266, 310――ii. 362, 364, 413,
    418 _bis_, 432――iii. 1, 40, 45, 104, 114, 121, 166, 254 _bis_, 298,
    301, 456, 457, 461――iv. 6, 7, 15, 39 _bis_, 40 _ter._, 70, 152,
    185.――Romantic, iii. 42. Its banks 460.――The country adjacent to,
    may be proud of Mr. Call, iv. 9
  Tamara, the Roman, iv. 40
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 291
  Tamarix Gallica, iv. 180
  Tamarton, i. 107
  ―――― chapel, Devon, iv. 39
  ―――― hundred, Devon, iv. 39
  ―――― parish, iv. 131, 152 _bis_
  TAMARTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, Tamar river,
    mentioned by Ptolemy, ancient name of the parish, church recent,
    land tax, manor, iv. 39. Line of a Saxon poet on Athelstan’s victory
    40. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name, value of benefice, a
    rectory, incumbent, patron ibid. Manor 41. By Editor, Lysons on the
    descents of property, manor of Hornacott, Ogbere, Vacye, villages of
    Alvacot, Headon, and Venton, statistics, ib. Incumbent, and Geology
    by Dr. Boase 42
  Tamarton parish, Devon, iv. 39
  ―――― north, manor, iv. 41
  Tamerton, i. 241――ii. 430
  Tamerworth harbour, iii. 104, 105
  Tamesworth haven, i. 32
  Tanis, parish of, ii. 208
  Tanner, i. 146, 153 _ter._, 159.――Bishop 200――ii. 201, 246――iii.
    233, 448, 449――iv. 104, 112.――His Notitia Monastica, i. 134, 146,
    250, 251, 300――ii. 209――iv. 102, 104. App. 10. 319 to 336.――John,
    iii. 202, 372, 450. Love story of 449. Rev. Mr. 199. Rev. Mr. of St.
    Stephen’s in Branel 448. Family 198
  ―――― of Carvinike, Anthony, i. 386
  ―――― of Court and Boderick, i. 387
  ―――― of Cullumpton, George, ii. 110
  Taperell, John, iii. 16
  Tapestry at Trewinard, i. 358
  Tarr, Rev. Mr. ii. 251
  Tarsus, iii. 284
  Tassagard, iv. 146
  Tathius, St. notice of, ii. 44
  Taunton, ii. 27, 76, 190, 191.――Insurgents march to, i. 86
  ―――― Richard of Truro, lent Hals’s MS. to the Editor, the son of W.
    E. iii. 18. Richard 407. Family 18
  Tavistock, i. 158, 159
  ―――― Abbey, in Devon, ii. 274――iii. 372, 384, 385, 459, 460――iv. 6,
    64, 169, 171.――Abbot of, ii. 365――iii. 459 _bis_.――Livignus, ii. 60.
    Osbert 426
  ―――― market, i. 79
  ―――― river, source of, iv. 237
  Tawlaght, iv. 146
  Taxatio Benefic. of Pope Nicholas, iii. 5, 24, 40, 112, 277, 291,
    306 _bis_, 334, 336, 339, 345, 352, 372, 374, 384, 396, 437, 442,
    443, 457 _bis_――iv. 15, 23, 40, 44, 62, 66, 76, 95, 112, 118, 129,
    140, 153, 162
  ―――― Eccles. ii. 394 _bis_――iv. 159
  Taxation of Pope Nicholas, iv. 46.――To the Pope’s Annats, ii. 116
  Taylder of St. Mabe, Joan, and Thomas her father, iii. 76
  Taylor, i. 32
  Teague, Mr. i. 254
  Teath, St. parish, i. 375, 382――ii. 401, or Tethe, iv. 95 _bis_,
    99, 137
  TEATH, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, saint, his
    history, iv. 42. Ancient name, value of benefice, land tax,
    Bodanan, the Cheyney family, their monuments and arms in the
    church 43. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, saint, a vicarage,
    value, patron, impropriator 44. By the Editor, Lysons gives the
    descent of property, Tregordock manor, Drillavale Quarry,
    Treveares, Captain Bligh of the Bounty 45. Church, age, situation,
    roads, anecdotes of Mr. Phillips, value of benefice 46.
    Statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase, Treburget mine 47
  Tedda, i. 2
  Tees river, i. 290
  Tegleston, i. 1
  Tehidy, ii. 241.――Manor, iii. 380 _bis_, and Honor 384, 388, 389
    _bis_, 390
  Temple bar, iii. 142
  ―――― Rev. Mr. character of, ii. 104
  ―――― manor, iv. 48
  ―――― moors, ii. 36――iv. 46, 48
  ―――― parish, i. 21, 60, 167――iv. 128, 129
  TEMPLE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, Knights
    Templars, ancient name, value of benefice, iv. 48. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, value of benefice 49. By Editor, church
    founded by the Templars ibid. Potatoes cultivated, parish attached
    to the manor of Treleigh, patronage, incumbent, statistics, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 50
  Temporibus, John de, iii. 313
  Tencreek, account of, i. 254.――A singular tree there, iii. 169
  ―――― of Tencreek, i. 254, 347 _bis_, 396. Arms 255
  ―――― of Treworgan, i. 206
  Terceira islands, a battle with the Spaniards off, ii. 344
  Terence, notes on, iv. 87
  Tereza, St. iii. 150
  Terrill, Sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Testa, Abbess of Wimborne, iv. 126
  Teth, St. i. 322――iv. 66
  Teucrium latifolia, iv. 183
  ―――― frutescens, iv. 183
  Teuthey, by Leland, iv. 279
  Teutonic ears, name of Winifred not soft enough for, iv. 127
  Tew, St. i. 174
  Tewan, i. 11
  Tewardevi, iv. 93
  Tewington manor, by Hals, i. 41. Antiquity, court leet, etymology
    45. By Tonkin, etymology 46. Possessors, and quarry at 47
  Tewkesbury abbey, i. 288.――Gloucestershire, iv. 140
  ―――― battle of, ii. 260. Sir John Grenville left for dead on the
    field 345
  Teynham, Lord, iii. 140
  Thamar river, iv. 233
  Thames river, iii. 10, 63, 310. High water in 98
  Thanks, i. 37
  Thaumaturgus, Gregory, i. 388
  Theliaus, St. history of, i. 321
  ―――― St. church, i. 321
  Theocritus, by Warton, ii. 266
  Theodore, iv. 8
  Thesdon, a Prince of Cornwall, iii. 342
  Thesdon’s castle, iii. 342
  Thessalonica, principality of, sale of the city to the Venetians,
    ii. 366
  Thetford, ii. 76
  Thica Vosa, an intrenchment, ii. 113
  Thick, Reginald de, i. 383
  Thomas the Rhymer, ii. 308
  Thomas, Henry, i. 277. J. 10. John 19.――Mr. ii. 414.――John and
    Richard took the name of Pendarves, two brothers took that of
    Carnsew, another of Roscrow, and another of Caweth, the arms of all,
    ii. 337.――Andrew, John, his father, and John, iii. 326. John, built
    a house at Chiverton 333. William changed his name to Carnsew 61.
    Miss 333. Family 125. Arms 326.――John, iv. 109 _bis_. John acquired
    a fortune at Truro 90. Rev. Samuel of Truro 76. Miss 117
  ―――― of Glamorganshire, in Wales, Howell and family, iii. 326
  ―――― of Tregamena in Verian, iii. 202
  ―――― of Treon, i. 136
  ―――― St. Apostle and martyr, iv. 50. His day 2
  ―――― St. Aquinas, i. 312
  ―――― St. à Becket, i. 158, or of Canterbury, ii. 73, 96 _bis_,
    156――iv. 1, 50
  ―――― St. church, iii. 458
  ―――― St. parish, St. i. 377――ii. 417, 420――iii. 335, 456, 457, 458
    _bis_
  THOMAS, ST. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, antiquity,
    value of benefice, iv. 50. By Tonkin, boundaries, shape, river
    Kensey 51. By Editor, church small, stands on the site of Launceston
    priory, its remains, well, statistics ibid.――Incumbent, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 52
  Thomas’s, St. street, iv. 51
  Thompson, James, i. 58.――John, ii. 192.――Henry and Rev. J. T., iv. 109
  Thoms, i. 94 _bis_.――Mr. family name changed, and arms, iii. 125
  Thomy, Robert, iii. 125
  Thomye, Robert, iii. 143
  Thorlibear manor, ii. 416
  Thornbury in Devon, iii. 450
  Three Barrows, ii. 317
  Thriades, book of the, i. 338
  Throckmorton, Clement, i. 16
  Throwley, Sir Nicholas, ii. 395
  Thunbergia, Coccinea, iv. 183
  Thunderbolt at St. Michael’s Mount, ii. 199
  Thundering Legion, miracle of, ii. 76
  Thunderstorm, ii. 157
  Thuraken, a Turkish General, ii. 367 _bis_
  Thurigny and Grenville, Robert Fitz Hamon, Lord of, ii. 344, 347
  Thurlebear family, iii. 270
  Thurlebere, account of, iv. 13
  ―――― de, John, family and heiress, iv. 13
  Thynne, Henry Frederick, Lord Carteret heir of the Grenville
    property, and Lord George present possessor of the title and
    estates, ii. 346
  Tiber river, iv. 148
  Tiberius, Emperor, i. 197
  Tide, high, hours of at various ports, iii. 98. Nine hours and half
    flowing from Land’s End to London 99. Extraordinary in 1099, 310
  Tidiford village, ii. 362. Trade at, limestone burnt at 362
  Tidlaton, ii. 427
  Ties, Henry de, ii. 130
  Tilbury, army at, i. 161
  Tillie, Stephen, i. 270, 271 _bis_, 274.――Sir James, iii. 163, 346.
    His extraordinary will 163, 166. Other particulars of him, his arms
    destroyed 166. J. W., 346. Count 166
  Tillie, manor, iv. 55
  Tilly, James, i. 315. Sir James assumed the arms of Count Tilly,
    deprived of them 314. Directions for his funeral 315
  ―――― of Pentilly, James, iii. 44
  Timothy, Epistle to, i. 198, 206
  Tin, fetched by the Greeks from Falmouth harbour, ii. 3. Mode of
    selling in Cornwall 318
  ―――― smelting-house at Treloweth, i. 365. Lamb tin preferred abroad 365
  ―――― stream, of Luxilian, iii. 58
  ―――― works in Stoke Climsland parish, iv. 6
  Tincombe, Mr. iv. 4
  Tindall’s Bible, i. 314
  Tinmouth, John of, iii. 331
  Tinners, St. Perran the patron of, iii. 313
  Tinney Hall, manor, iii. 38
  Tintagel, by Leland, iv. 284
  ―――― castle, by Leland, iv. 259
  Tintagell castle, i. 381――ii. 308, 402.――Seat of the Dukes of
    Cornwall, and birth-place of King Arthur, i. 339. _See Dundagell_
  ―――― parish, ii. 401――iii. 22――iv. 44, 66.――King Arthur’s castle in,
    curious rock, iii. 180. _See Dundagell_
  TINTAGELL parish. _See Dundagell_
  Tinten manor, iv. 97
  Tippet or Tebbot of Callestock Veor, John and family, iii. 321
  ―――― of St. Wen, family, iii. 321
  Tippett, John, iii. 341
  Titanium, a metal discovered in Manaccan parish, iii. 113
  Titus, Emperor, i. 198
  Tiverton, i. 170
  ―――― school, iii. 258
  Toby, i. 282
  Todi in Tuscany, ii. 125
  Todscad, i. 212
  Tol Peder-Penwith, iii. 35, 36. Scenery, accident at 35
  Tolcarne, ii. 48――iii. 232.――Account of, ii. 278
  ―――― or minster, an alien priory, iv. 101
  Tolgoath, i. 415
  Tollays in Redruth and St. Just, iii. 359
  Toller, Mr. ii. 43
  Tollgus manor, iii. 382, 383. Etymology 382. House 383
  Tolskiddy, i. 213
  Tolverne manor, ii. 275, 276, _bis_, 278 _bis_. Henry 8th said to
    have passed two nights at 280
  Tom, Great, of Oxford, inscription upon, iii. 241
  Tombstone at Gunwall, ii. 128
  Tomm, i. 78
  Toms, Miss, iii. 176
  Tonacomb, iii. 255
  Tonkin, Mr. i. 296. James 10. Thomas 8, 9, 10. Rev. Uriah 147.
    Particulars of the family, and monumental inscriptions 12. Arms 9.
    Arms and motto 13.――Hugh, iii. 325. John, his character and adoption
    of Sir Humphrey Davy 94.――Thomas the historian of Cornwall, ii. 75,
    76, 104, 199, 238, 239, 251, 256, 295, 297, 354 _bis_, 381, 383,
    399, 405, 411.――iii. 17, 20, 32, 38, 57, 62, 63, 66, 90, 120, 135,
    177 _bis_, 192 _bis_, 205, 214, 223, 228, 231 _bis_, 238 _bis_, 243,
    245, 261, 274, 302, 313, 314, 318 _bis_, 320, 322, 323, 325, 328,
    366 _bis_, 386, 405, 406, 434, 451.――iv. 24, 25, 62, 65, 76 _bis_,
    78, 120 _ter._, 165.――His Parochial history, iii. 96.――His notion of
    a Danish camp controverted, iv. 78, 80, 81. Does not notice the
    Scilly Isles 168. His etymology of Elerky 119, 120. Whitaker’s
    remarks on it 119.――Rev. Uriah, iii. 7, 94. Vicar of Lelant 88.
    Character of 94. Family 94
  ―――― of Newlyn, iii. 429
  ―――― of Penwenick, Michael, iii. 315 _bis_. His arms 315
  ―――― of Trelevan, Mr. iii. 193
  ―――― of Trenance, near Porthoustock, Mr. ii. 326
  ―――― of Trevannance, Thomas, iii. 358
  Tonkyn, Miss, ii. 255
  ―――― of St. Agnes, i. 234
  ―――― of Hendre, John, i. 234
  ―――― of Trevownas, i. 396
  ―――― of Trewawnance Julian, i. 399. Thomas 399, 400
  Tonsen, i. 254
  Tooke, John, ii. 195
  Tor Point, iii. 121. Road to Leskeard from 439
  Torbay, King William’s landing at, ii. 112. English fleet anchored
    in 247
  Torleh, John, iii. 387
  Torr, Mr. iii. 321
  Tory administration, ii. 245
  Tothill, William, ii. 195
  Totness in Devon, iii. 102, 103
  Tottysdone, ii. 429
  Touche family, ii. 415
  Touchet, James, Lord Audley, i. 86
  Toup, Jonathan, ii. 284. An eminent scholar, his father lecturer of
    St. Ives, his education, &c. and principal works 265. Death and
    monument 266.――Rev. Jonathan, iii. 123 _bis_. Monument to 123
  Towan, i. 234――iii. 340, 345
  Towednack parish, ii. 260, 271, 358――iii. 5 _bis_, 7, 13, 46――iv. 164
  TOWEDNACK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, iv. 52.
    Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land tax,
    Castle-an-Dunes, Trecragan 53. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    name, daughter to Lelant, ib. By Editor, saint, soil ibid. Produces
    much tin, also some whetstone, Editor’s manor, court rolls complete,
    foundation of the walls of Amellibrea, Cornish tenures 54. Copyholds
    extinct, record of a manor court, the homage, oath, charge 55.
    Matters to be presented 56. A petition from the widow of Colonel
    Humphrey Noye to Charles 2nd, for the title of Sandys of the Vine
    57. Unsuccessful, impropriation, feast, statistics 58. Geology by Dr
    Boase 59
  Tower, i. 29
  ―――― of London, i. 134――iii. 154, 298, 350――iv. 83.――Sir John Eliot
    committed to, ii. 66. Perkin Warbeck ditto 190, 191.――Sir Richard
    Vyvyan conveyed to, iii. 136, 217. His daughter born there 136. The
    Bishops committed to 296. Mr. Buller sent to 464
  Towington, iii. 195
  Townsend, Francis, Windsor Herald, ii. 375
  “Tractatus de Corde,” &c. iv. 98
  Tracy family, iii. 286
  Tracye, Thomas de, ii. 119
  Tradescantia crassula, iv. 183
  Tragedies of Seneca, notes on, iv. 87
  Trajan, Emperor, i. 206
  Transubstantiation, Cornish doctrine against, i. 109. Berengarius
    against, Romish doctrine triumphant 110
  Travelling a century ago, anecdote of, iv. 91
  Travers, Mr. i. 324
  Tre Yeo, ii. 416
  Treago, account of, i. 248
  ―――― of Treago, i. 248. Arms 249
  Trearick, Prebend of, i. 383
  Trearike, Lord of, i. 382
  Trease of Blissland, etymology, i. 61
  Treassow, account of, iii. 47. A perturbed spirit banished from 48
  Treasurer of England, Lord High, William Scrope, Earl of Wiltshire,
    iii. 129
  Trebant water, iv. 29
  Trebarfoot, iii. 352
  ―――― of Trebarfoot, family, iii. 352
  Trebartha, account of by Editor, ii. 228. Monuments to its
    possessors 229
  Trebatha, account of, ii. 226
  Trebeigh manor in St. Ives, iv. 50
  Trebell village, ii. 385
  Trebennen borough, i. 323 _ter._
  Treberrick in St. Michael Carhays, account of, iii. 202
  Trebersey family, iii. 337
  Trebigh, i. 410. Account of 411
  Trebilliock, two brothers, ii. 255
  Trebizond, empire of, ii. 368
  Treblithike, iii. 65
  Treburget, iv. 47
  Trebursus, ii. 428
  Treby of Trebigh, Hon. George, Lord Chief Justice, and arms, i. 412
  Trecan, iii. 448.――Account of, ii. 397
  Trecarrell, iii. 438
  ―――― family and arms, iii. 40, 41
  ―――― of Trecarrell, Sir H. iii. 44. Built Launceston church 42; and
    re-built Linkinhorne church 45
  ―――― manor, iii. 40, 41. Account of, and monuments to its possessors 43
  Trecragen castle, iv. 53
  ―――― hall, iv. 53
  Trecroben, iii. 7
  ―――― hill, iii. 7. Account of 11
  Trecroogo village, iii. 337
  Tredawl, i. 25
  Tredeathy, account of, iii. 66
  Tredenham, Sir Joseph, i. 44.――Family, i. 305, 414――iii. 381
  ―――― of Lambesso, i. 207
  ―――― of Tredenham, i. 417.――In Probus, family and Sir Joseph, ii.
    217.――Sir Joseph, family, iii. 361; and their property 362. Arms 361
    _bis_
  ―――― of Tregonan, i. 418. John 416, 418. Sir John and Mary 418. Sir
    Joseph, _ter._ and Sir William 416
  ―――― manor, iii. 361
  Tredevy, by Leland, iv. 258
  Tredidon barton, iii. 459
  ―――― of Tredidon, family, iii. 459
  Tredine castle, by Leland, iv. 265
  Tredinham family, ii. 276 _bis_, 281. Sir Joseph 170. Governor of
    St. Mawe’s castle 277. Patron of St. Just 278
  Tredinick, i. 116, 117. Etymology 117
  ―――― Christopher and his arms, i. 116
  ―――― of St. Breock, arms, iv. 95
  Tredrea, the Editor’s place in Cornwall, iii. 307――iv. 143.――Account
    of, i. 360
  ―――― of Tredrea, i. 360, 365
  Tredreath town, iii. 6, 8
  Tree, singular one at Tencreek, iii. 169
  Treegoodwill, ii. 405
  Treen manor, iv. 166
  Trees, subterranean, ii. 207
  Trefelens of Trefelens, William, iii. 326
  Trefey family, iii. 44
  Treffrey in Lanhidrock, account of, ii. 380
  ―――― in Linkinhorne, ii. 380
  ―――― of Fowey, family, ii. 380
  Treffreye, i. 383.――John, defended Fowey against the French, ii. 40.
    His seat at Plase and history 43. John, Sheriff of Cornwall, Sir
    John, William and arms, these cut in Fowey church ibid.
  Treffry family, ii. 36. Thomas fortified his house 46. Mr. Sheriff
    of Cornwall 186. Mr. 279.――Elizabeth, iii. 71. John 72.
    Miss 67.――Miss, iv. 24
  Trefilis, iii. 402
  Trefreke, account of, i. 383
  Trefrew village, ii. 405
  Trefrize manor, iii. 44
  Trefronick, i. 20
  Trefry, John, iii. 347
  Trefusis, i. 125, 225, 226. James 240. Otho de 348――ii. 32. John,
    his lines on Captain Rouse 278. Rev. John 231. R. G. W. Lord Clinton
    313 _bis_, 314 _bis_.――Catherine, iii. 41. Francis 228. Mary 41.
    Nicholas 40 _bis_, 41. Otho 318. Robert 224. Miss 60. Mr. 230. Lord
    Clinton ibid. Family 40, 107, 117, 230, 254, 390. Arms 318.――Family,
    iv. 62
  ―――― of Landew, family, ii. 399
  ―――― of Trefusis, i. 65, 240. George William 151.――Richard, ii.
    304.――Bridget, Francis, iii. 62. Robert 327, 282. Samuel 227. Mr.
    382. Family and arms 227
  ―――― manor, iii. 382. Account of 226. House 227. Situation 231
  Trefyns, account of, ii. 130, 131
  Tregaga or Tresaga family, iii. 209
  ―――― house in Ruan Lanyhorne, iii. 209
  Tregagle, Mr. ii. 332 _bis_, 335
  ―――― of Trevorder in St. Breock, tale of one, family, and arms, iii. 265
  Tregago or Trejago, account of, iii. 403
  ―――― castle, &c. house, iii. 403
  ―――― or Trejago, i. 117.――Jane, John de, and Stephen, iii. 211.
    Family 208 _bis_, 214
  ―――― of Tregago, family, built the castle, iii. 403
  Tregallen village, iii. 337
  Tregalravean, account of, ii. 56
  Tregameer, i. 140
  Tregamynyon, account of, iii. 242
  Treganetha, iv. 140
  Tregantle, iii. 438
  Treganyan of Treganyan, family, iii. 215
  ―――― tenement, iii. 209, 215. Etymology 212
  Tregaraan, ii. 51
  Tregaradue, ii. 50
  Tregarden, ii. 109
  Tregare, ii. 50, 275
  Tregarick of Tregarick, Matilda, Mr. and family, iii. 397
  ―――― manor, account of by Hals, iii. 396. By Whitaker 397
  Tregarne manor, ii. 320
  Tregarrick, iv. 29
  Tregarthen family, ii. 114
  Tregarthin of Court, in Brand, family, iii. 198
  Tregarthyn family, ancient and powerful, Catherine, ii. 109. Jane,
    Joan, and her epitaph 110. John 109 _bis_, 110. Margaret 109, 110.
    Mary ibid. Thomas 109 _bis_, 110. Arms 110
  Tregaseal, i. 141
  Tregavethan manor in Kenwin, iii. 192
  Tregavethick village, ii. 399
  Tregavethnan manor, account of by Hals and by Tonkin, ii. 316
  Tregavithick manor, account of, ii. 400
  Tregaza, account of, i. 394
  Tregea, of St. Agnes, John, iii. 315. William 326. Capt. William 315
  ―――― of Lambrigan, William, ii. 353
  Tregeagle, i. 18, 19. John 19.――John, ii. 338
  ―――― of Trevorden, John, iii. 76
  Tregean, Francis, ii. 354
  Tregear manor, iii. 2 _bis_
  Tregeare, account of, i. 263, 264
  ―――― of Tregeare, i. 263, 264. Richard 263. Arms 263, 264. Etymology 264
  ―――― manor, ii. 56, 336. Account of 51, 377. Geran’s parish, part of
    it 54. Purchased by Kempe 57
  Tregedick family, ii. 316
  Tregelly manor, iii. 170
  Tregembo, ii. 217, 218
  Tregena, Mr. ii. 255
  Tregenhawke, account of, ii. 252
  Tregenna, near St. Ives, ii. 215.――Mr. Stephens’s house at, i. 403
    _bis_――ii. 270. Beautiful prospect from a hill near 272.――Rev. John
    of Roach and Mawgan in Pider, iii. 139, 396 _bis_, 399. Miss, Mr.
    and family 406.――Rev. Mr. of Whitstone, iv. 152
  ―――― village, ii. 357
  Tregenno, account of, i. 421
  Tregenyn, i. 408
  Tregethes, i. 364
  Tregew, account of its possessors, ii. 30
  Tregheney Brygge, iv. 255
  Tregheny castle, iv. 228
  Tregian, account of, i. 420
  ―――― family, i. 234, 248.――Francis, ii. 353――iii. 243, 269, 355. His
    history 357 to 360. List of his lost estates 358. Francis the son
    383. His history 360. Persecution 368. Adventure 369. Jane 358. Mr.
    357 _ter._ The unfortunate 549 Mr. 405. Their posterity existing
    in Spain 361. Arms 357.――Francis, iv. 118. Margaret 72
  Tregian of Golden, i. 420
  ―――― of Walvedon, Miss, iii. 102, 103
  Tregillas, John, i. 10
  Tregion, Francis, ii. 305
  ―――― or Tregyn in St. Ewe, iii. 358
  Treglaston, iii. 350
  Tregleah, account of, i. 372
  Treglisson family, iii. 343
  Treglith, iv. 62
  Tregof, ii. 427
  Tregoll village, iii. 353
  Tregonan, i. 418. Account of 416
  Tregone tenement, iii. 223
  Tregonell, account of, i. 247
  ―――― of Middleton, John, i. 247, 248. Sir John 248
  ―――― of Tregonell, i. 247. Arms ibid.
  Tregoney or Tregony parish, iv. 115, 166
  Tregonissy, i. 49
  Tregonnan, in St. Ewe, iii. 361
  Tregonnebris, occupiers of, iii. 427
  Tregonnen village, iii. 334
  Tregonning hill, i. 128 _bis_
  Tregony borough, account of, i. 295. Arms 296.――Members for, Charles
    Trevanion, iii. 200. William Trevanion 205
  ―――― branch of Fale river, iii. 405
  ―――― bridge, i. 245, 299――iii. 207
  ―――― castle, i. 296, 299――ii. 2
  ―――― church, i. 74
  ―――― manor, i. 296
  ―――― parish, i. 242
  ―――― priory, i. 299, 300
  ―――― town, ii. 17, 180――iii. 404, 451. German school at 67
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 272, 289
  ―――― Medan, i. 294 _bis_, 297
  ―――― Pomeroy, i. 297 _bis_
  Tregoos chapel, i. 218
  Tregordock manor, iv. 44
  Tregorick, i. 49
  Tregors, Andrew de, iii. 372
  Tregose, ii. 320.――Miss, iii. 421――iv. 24
  Tregoss moor, i. 230.――Moors, iv. 26
  Tregothick, i. 125
  Tregothnan, i. 140――ii. 33, 308 _bis_――iv. 167
  ―――― of Tregothnan, Johanna. John, and family, iii. 212
  Tregothnan manor, iii. 208, 209, 464. And tenement 209, 215. Gates
    and houses of 209. New house at 212. Account of ibid. Description
    221. Carried to the Boscawens 213
  Tregou village, ii. 399
  Tregoweth of Crantock, Margaret, iii. 177
  Tregoze, i. 39――ii. 130――Arms, i. 39
  Tregtheney-Pomerey castle, iv. 228
  Tregullan village, ii. 385
  Tregumbo, account of, ii. 170
  Tregurtha, ii. 218. Abounds in mines 219
  Tregury, now Tregotha, iv. 143 _bis_
  ―――― Michael de, Archbishop of Dublin, iv. 138, 141, 143, 145.
    Governor of Caen University 138, 144, 145 _bis_. His life 144.
    Ware’s mention of him 145. Buried at St. Patrick’s, Dublin 138. Tomb
    141. Epitaph 138. Death 146. Will 147. Works 148. Family, last heir
    male and three coheirs 143
  Tregwerys, or Trewerys in Probus, iii. 360
  Tregyon family, iii. 404
  Trehane barton, iii. 354, 355, 366, 367, _bis_.――Account of, i. 397
  ―――― of Trehane family, iii. 354. Arms 355
  Trehanick in St. Teath, iii. 212
  Trehavarike, account of, ii. 335
  ―――― of Trehavarike family, ii. 335
  Trehawke family, ii. 399.――Mr. a miser, iii. 19. Family and
    monuments to 20
  ―――― of Leskeard, Mrs. iv. 97
  ―――― of Trehawke, arms, iii. 169
  ―――― iii. 168, or Trehavock, account of 169
  Trehunest village, iii. 372
  Trehunsey manor, iii. 372
  Treiagu, John de, iv. 96
  Treice, Mr. ii. 87
  Treise, Sir Christopher, i. 321.――Family and heir, iv. 60
  Treiwall, ii. 208
  Trejago castle, ii. 2
  ―――― creek, ii. 2
  ―――― Jene, John de, and Stephen, iii. 211. Family 214
  Trekininge, account of, i. 219, 223
  ―――― Vean, account of, i. 225
  Trekynin, Jenkyn, iii. 318
  Trelagoe village and manor, i. 3
  Treland Vean, account of, ii. 320
  ―――― Vear, account of, ii. 320
  Trelask manor, iii. 37, 38 _bis_
  Trelauder of Hengar, family and heir, iv. 94
  Trelaun by Leland, iv. 280
  Trelawder of Hengar, or St. Mabyn family, gentlemen of blood and
    arms, their marriages and heir, arms the same as Tredinick’s, iv. 95
  Trelawn, iii. 293. History of by Bond, and house built at 295.
    Masses performed at 301
  ―――― mill, iv. 29
  ―――― wood, iv. 29
  Trelawney in Pelynt, the Hearles settled at, ii. 99
  ―――― family, i. 23. Jane 221. John 65. Sir John 221. W. S., 158.
    Arms 23.――Family, ii. 255, 309. Anna 235. Charles 77 _bis_. Edward
    ibid. Rev. Heal 394. Sir John, Sir Beville Grenville’s letter to
    349. Sir Jonathan 55, 235
  ―――― of Coldrynike, Jonathan and Major John, ii. 67
  ―――― of Lamellin, Sir John, ii. 411
  ―――― of Poble, Kent, ii. 7
  ―――― of Poole, ii. 67. John 411, 412. Sir Jonathan 16――iii. 133. Sir
    Jonathan 168. Family now of Trelawen 170. Arms 169
  ―――― of Trelawne, ii. 67
  Trelawny barton in Altarnun, account of, i. 22.――The cradle of the
    family, iii. 294
  ―――― ii. 151, 397. Rev. E., 229. Edward, Dean of Exeter 238 _bis_.
    Hele and Mr. 230.――Edward, governor of Jamaica, iii. 295 _bis_, 300.
    Rebuilt his house 295. Notice of 299. Monument to and epitaph upon
    292. Sir Harry the Roman Catholic Bishop, memoir of 300. Henry 297.
    Sir John, memoir of, couplet upon, rebuilt his house 295. Sir
    Jonathan, Bishop of Bristol, Exeter, and Winchester 248, 295 _bis_,
    296. Memoir of, one of the seven Bishops sent to the tower 296.
    Letitia 297. Rebecca 248, 249, 297. Sir William 219. Governor of
    Jamaica 300. Sir W. L. S., 301. Family 293. Name 294. Arms 295.
    Monument 292. Saying relating to the family 295.――Major-General
    Charles, governor of Plymouth, iv. 94. Sir Jonathan 34, 139. Sir
    William 37. Rev. Mr. of St. Tudy 93. Arms 96
  Trelawny of Coldrinick, John, iv. 94
  ―――― of the Lawn, Jane, and Sir John, i. 225
  ―――― of Menhynyet, iii. 168
  ―――― of Trelawny, i. 65
  Treleage manor, etymology of, ii. 319
  Trelean, account of, i. 420
  Treleare, the Editor’s farm, ii. 308
  Trelegar, ii. 54, 57. Account, of 55
  Treleigh in Redruth, iii. 359. Manor 383, 384. Account of 383
  Trelevan, iii. 125, 191. Manor 192 _bis_, 194. Occupiers of 192
  Trelevant, of St. Agnes, Hector, iii. 243
  Trelewick, account of, i. 420
  Treligan, i. 27.――Account of, ii. 54
  Trelil, ii. 139
  Trelisick, i. 418. Account of 350, 359, 417. House 359.――Account of
    and house built at, ii. 32.――Or Trelizike in St. Earth, iii. 318, 423
  Trelisike, account of, i. 348.――Or Trelizik, iii. 125
  Trelogas, account of, ii. 300
  Trelowarren, account of, iii. 133, 137
  Treloweth, i. 365. Smelting house at ibid.
  Trelowith manor, iii. 355
  Trelowthes manor, iii. 355
  Treloye chapel, i. 231
  Treluddera, Treluddero, or Treludra, iii. 267, 268, 272――iv.
    141――Rights of, ii. 271
  Treluddro in Newlyn, iii. 319
  Treludra Pippen, iii. 268――iv. 141
  Trelugan manor, ii. 363
  Treluick, account of, i. 417
  Trelven, i. 174
  Trelynike, account of, i. 379
  Tremabe, description of, i. 177
  Tremada, account of, i. 319
  Tremagenna, ii. 405
  Tremain, by Leland, iv. 270
  Tremaine church, iv. 60
  ―――― Rev. H. H. ii. 99.――William, his garden, iii. 343
  ―――― parish, iv. 61, 64, 124, 125, 127
  TREMAINE, or Tremean parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    endowment, impropriation, land tax, chapel of ease to Egloskerry,
    iv. 59. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries 59. Name, daughter to
    Egloskerry 60. By Editor, manor of Tremaine, church, its name,
    patron, impropriation, saint, his feast, statistics 60. Geology by
    Dr. Boase 61
  Tremanheer of Penzance, i. 162
  Tremarastall, ii. 169, 170
  Trematon, i. 199, 203――ii. 70.――iv. 81. By Leland 291
  ―――― castle, i. 296, 297――ii. 42
  ―――― manor, i. 296, 297――iii. 462 _bis_. History of 462
  Tremayne in Mabe, account of, iii. 60
  ―――― in St. Colomb, Major, iii. 61
  ―――― in St. Martyn’s, iii. 61, 63. Account of 124, 126
  ―――― Rev. Charles, i. 398. Rev. H. H., 423, 424. His character 423.
    John 422. John, H., 423, 424. His character 423. Lewis 420, 423. Mr.
    417. Serjeant 424.――Mr. ii. 134.――Arthur, Degory, Edmund, Edmund,
    iii. 61. John, John, John 60. J. H., 230. Rev. Nicholas, Peres de,
    Peros, Richard 60. Richard Roger 61. Thomas, Thomas, Thomas 60. Rev.
    Dr. of Menheniet 171. Miss 102. Mr. 192, 194. Family 60, 197.
    Estates increased 60
  ―――― of Collacomb, i. 416
  ―――― of Croan, H. H. and J. H. i., 377
  ―――― of St. Ewe, Sampson, senior, i. 419.――Or of Heligan or
    Halligan, in St. Ewe, J. H., iii. 240. Lewis 191, 196. Mr. 193
    _bis_. Family 61, 63, 126, 240.――Of Halliggon, Sir John, Col. Lewis,
    Rev. W. and Mr. i. 416. Of Heligan, Rev. H. H., 260, 359. John 260,
    419 _bis_. Sir John and Col. Lewis 419
  ―――― of St. Ive, i. 45
  ―――― of Sydenham, i. 201――iii. 126
  ―――― of Tremayne family, and Miss, iii. 126
  ―――― manor, iv. 60
  ―――― parish in East hundred, iii. 61
  ―――― vicarage, i. 378
  Trembath in Madern, iii. 33, 56
  Trembetha, account of, iii. 7
  Trembleth, account of, i. 405 _bis_
  ―――― chapel, i. 405
  ―――― heir of, iii. 140
  ―――― of Trembleth, arms, iii. 405. Burying place ibid.
  Tremblethick, i. 405
  Trembraze in Leskeard, iii. 209
  ―――― Rev. Mr. of St. Michael Penkivell, iii. 209
  Tremeal, iii. 337 _bis_. House rebuilt 338
  Tremearne, Rev. John, iii. 287
  Tremeen, iv. 97
  Tremenheere, Captain H. P. character of, iii. 88. John, endowed a
    chapel at Penzance 93. Mr. 82. Family 94. Have adorned the new
    church at Penzance 93
  Tremere, account of, ii. 384
  ―――― of Tremere family, ii. 384. Alice, John, and arms 385
  Tremertoun, by Leland, iv. 281
  Tremiloret, iii. 59
  Tremle, William, iii. 115
  Tremoderet en Hell, iii. 393
  Tremogh family, iii. 62
  ―――― etymology, iii. 62. Road near 63
  Tremolesworth, i. 370
  Tremolla in Northill Linkinborne and Liskeard, iii. 359
  Tremoore village, ii. 385
  Tremough, account of, iii. 60, 62
  Tremper bridge, i. 235
  Tremporth river, i. 249. Account of its haven and bridge ibid.
  Tremyton castle, iv. 229
  Trenake, iv. 23
  Trenalt, i. 159
  Trenance, i. 41 _bis_, or Trenants, iv. 160. Account of 161 _bis_
  ―――― Lyttleton, ii. 383.――Littleton, iv. 161.――Family, ii.
    383――iv. 161
  ―――― of Black Haye, John and three daughters, and arms, iv. 161
  Trenant, i. 320. Account of 321. Sold 320
  Trenaran, account of, i. 44
  Trenarran, i. 49
  Trenawick, i. 54
  Trenchard of Collacomb, Isabel, iii. 60
  Trenchicot, ii. 427
  Trencreek, i. 207. Account of 256
  ―――― Miss, iii. 75
  ―――― of Trencreek, Robert, i. 293. Arms 256
  Trenear, possessors, iii. 88
  Trenegles, i. 197
  Treneglos church, iv. 62
  ―――― parish, iv. 59, 64 _bis_, 124, 125 _bis_, 127
  TRENEGLOS parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Warbstow consolidated with
    it, iv. 61. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, etymology, ib.
    Impropriation, value of benefice, incumbent 62. By Editor, Tonkin’s
    etymology right, manor of Downeckney by Lysons, impropriation,
    patronage, statistics ibid. Incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 63
  Trenere, cellar at, ii. 138
  Trenethick, ii. 139
  Trenewan village, ii. 399
  Trenewith, by Leland, iv. 264
  Trengone, took the name of Nance, ii. 337
  Trengove, account of, iv. 128
  ―――― family, iii. 382――iv. 128, 129. Or nanc, John 129, 130. Arms 129
  ―――― of Trengove in Warlegan, family, ii. 238
  Trengreen, i. 54
  Trengwainton, iii. 289. Possessors 85
  Trenhayle, account of, i. 347
  ―――― George and Loveday, i. 357
  ―――― of Trenhayle, i. 347
  Trenheale, Rev. Reginald of Newlin, iii. 267
  Trenhorne village, iii. 38
  Trenithick or Trenithicke, account of, ii. 136, 137
  Trenorren, etymology by Tonkin, i. 47
  Trenouth, i. 221
  ―――― family, iii. 208
  ―――― of Fentongollan, Johanna and Ralph, iii. 397
  Trenoweth, i. 213
  ―――― of Bodrigan, Sir Henry, iii. 102
  ―――― of St. Colomb, Major, Miss, iii. 147. Family buried in St.
    Colomb church ibid.
  ―――― of Trenoweth, Catherine, iii. 211. John, John 211, 214.
    Margaret 211 _bis_. Maud 211. Philippa 211, 214. Family 213, 214
  ―――― lands, iii. 147
  Trenowith, i. 117.――Arms, the family changed their name to Bodrigan,
    ii. 107.――Family, iv. 71
  ―――― manor, i. 406. _See Trewithgy_
  Trenowth, arms, iv. 72
  Trenwith, account of, ii. 259, 261
  ―――― of Trenwith, i. 125――ii. 259, 260. Thomas and arms 259
  ―――― manor, iv. 52, 164
  Treonike, i. 18
  Trequanors, ii. 203, 211
  Treranell, account of, i. 405
  Treravall, i. 406
  Trereardrene, i. 12
  Trereen, Dinas, iii. 30, 34.――Described, iv. 165 _bis_.――Walk to
    church from, iii. 32
  Trereife, iii. 85
  Trerice manor, i. 20, 395――iii. 270. Sir John Arundell removed to
    274.――Cause of his removal, ii. 184
  Treridern, i. 321
  Treroach, Trecarrek or Tregarreck, iii. 391. Possessors 393
  Treruff manor, iii. 382
  Trerule fool, ii. 79
  Tresaddarne, i. 219
  Tresahar, i. 161.――Mr. ii. 11
  Tresassen, iv. 29
  Tresaster, i. 221
  Tresavren barton, iv. 4
  Tresawsen or Tresawsan, iii. 322. Account of 182
  Trescaw in Breage, ii. 217
  Trescobays, i. 136.――In Budock, iii. 248
  Trescow island, iv. 171, 172, 174. Extent of 175
  Tresilian, i. 10, 148――iii. 274
  ―――― or Tresillian bridge, i. 387――ii. 2, 17――iii. 207――iv. 76
  ―――― Sir Robert, Chief Justice, ii. 294.――Killed, iv. 16
  ―――― of Bodilly, Thomas, ii. 137
  ―――― of Roughtra, family, ii. 137
  ―――― of Tresilian, Robert, Lord Chief Justice, iii. 269
  ―――― or Tresulian, iii. 270. Manor 269
  ―――― river, iii. 180, 423
  Tresimple, account of, i. 205
  Tresinny, i. 3
  Tresithany chapel, i. 218
  Tresithney, Thomas, iii. 181. Heir of 140
  Treskeaw, i. 119
  Treskewis, Dame, iii. 60
  Tresmarrow, possessors of, iii. 337
  Tresmere parish, iv. 59, 60, 61 _bis_
  TRESMERE parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, value
    of benefice, endowment, impropriation, land tax, iv. 63. By
    Tonkin, situation, ib. Boundaries, etymology, value of benefice,
    impropriation, curate’s stipend withheld 64. By Editor, belonged
    to Launceston priory, churches served by monks, allusion to the
    “Last Minstrel” ibid. Councils ordained that each parish should
    have a resident priest, provision for them, distinction between
    vicar and perpetual curate, remark on Tonkin’s statement,
    impropriator, patron, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 65
  Tresmore manor, iv. 129
  Tresmorrow, ii. 418
  Tresona, i. 160
  Tresongar, account of, i. 383
  Tresore, iii. 77
  Tresparret Downs, ii. 88, 275
  Trespearn village, ii. 377
  Tress, ii. 151
  Tressmare, ii. 430
  Tresuggan, account of, i. 225
  Tresuran, i. 213
  Treswithan, i. 162, 163
  Trethac, i. 174
  Trethake, Matthew de, iii. 134
  Trethay, iii. 402
  Tretheage barton, iv. 2, 3. Described 4
  ―――― manor, iv. 2. Description and history of 3
  Trethergye, i. 49
  Tretheris, ruins of an ancient chapel at, i. 18
  Tretheves manor, account of, ii. 358
  Trethevye, Cromlech at, i. 193. Description of 194
  Trethewoll, account of, i. 408
  Trethewy village, iii. 337
  Trethil, iii. 440
  Trethinick, Ralph de, i. 246
  Trethurfe manor, account of, ii. 353, 354
  ―――― of Trethurfe family, and John, ii. 353. Reginald 354. Arms 353
  Trethym, i. 2, 25
  Trethyn castle, iv. 228
  Trethyrfe, Jane and Thomas, ii. 100
  ―――― of Trethyrfe, John, i. 65
  Treu-es-coit manor, iii. 64
  Treuren, by Leland, iv. 289
  Treuris, ii. 427 _bis_
  Trevadlack village, iii. 38
  Trevailer, account of, ii. 124
  Trevalaboth, ii. 203, 211
  Trevales, iv. 4
  Trevalga, i. 322――ii. 28, 235
  ―――― or Trevalgar parish, iii. 22, 232
  TREVALGA parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation, boundaries,
    antiquity, value of benefice, a rectory, patrons, iv. 66. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, a rectory, and its value ibid. Manor of
    Trevalga 67. By Editor, description of the parish church, near the
    cliff, named from the manor, patrons, rector, statistics ibid.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 68
  Trevallock, i. 140
  Trevance, account of, ii. 255
  Trevanion, possessors of, iii. 199. House described 201, 202
  ―――― i. 43, 113. Joan and Sir William 65.――John, M.P. for Cornwall,
    and rhyme on his election, ii. 351. Richard 110 _ter._ Mr. 118. Sir
    H. Bodrigan’s defence against him, shares Bodrigan’s property 115.
    Newnham manor given to him 318. Mr. 414. Sir Nicholas 56. Of St.
    German’s 162. Mr. 230. Nicholas, Richard, and Richard, iv. 116
  ―――― of Carhayes, i. 298.――John, ii. 304.――Charles, iv. 156. Mr.
    45.――Or Trevenion, John, iii. 141, 226. William ibid. Family 355
  ―――― of Crego, Charles, i. 297. Attempts to make the Val navigable 298
  ―――― of Crogith, i. 299
  ―――― of Tregarthyn, i. 397.――Charles, ii. 414
  ―――― of Trelegon, Anne and Hugh, i. 302.――Or Treligan, Hugh, iii. 191
  ―――― of Trevanion and Carhayes, Amey, Charles, iii. 199. Charles 200
    _bis_, 202. Sir Charles 199, 200, 201. Hugh, Hugh, Hugh 199. Sir
    Hugh, his sword 206. John 141. John 199. John 200. John and John
    improved Trevanion 201. John, a letter from 204. Colonel John 200,
    201. Colonel John, his death 204. J. T. P. B., 205 _bis_. Richard
    201. William 199, 201, 205 _bis_. Sir William, Sir William 199. Mr.
    and Rev. Mr. 200. Family 199, 203. Sided with Henry 7th 204. Arms
    200. Monuments 206
  ―――― of Trevorter, ii. 304. Alice ibid. John 304 _bis_. John and
    Mary ibid.
  ―――― of Trevoster, Alice and John, iii. 213
  Trevannance barton, i. 8. Etymology 8 and 9. Possessors 9. House
    taken down 10
  ―――― harbour, i. 11
  Trevannion family, ii. 395
  ―――― of Caryhaes, i. 43.――Of Caryhays, ii. 54, 55, 110. Charles 111
    _ter._
  ―――― of Trelegar, ii. 54, 57
  ―――― of Treligan, ii. 54. Hugh 51, 54, 55 _ter._ His lawsuit 51
  Trevanthions family, ii. 128
  Trevarnoe, occupiers of, iii. 446
  Trevartea, Onesa, iii. 60
  Trevarthen, account of, ii. 218
  Trevarthian, Miss and Mr. iii. 423
  Trevascus, account of, i. 114
  Trevasens, account of, i. 113
  Trevassack, iii. 342
  Treveale family, iii. 442
  Treveally, John, i. 119
  Trevear, account of, iii. 429
  Treveares, iv. 45
  Trevedarne in Buryan, iii. 134
  Treveeg, account of, ii. 86
  Trevega, iv. 157
  Treveleck, account of, i. 254
  Trevelga parish, iv. 42
  Trevelisick Wartha, i. 417
  ―――― Wollas, i. 417
  Trevella, William de, iii. 442 _bis_
  Trevellance or Trefelens, ii. 326, 327. Account of 326
  Trevellans, alias Nicholas, alias Williams, John and Nicholas, iii. 318
  Trevelles, i. 8――iii. 326. In St. Agnes 327
  Trevellick, account of, i. 257
  Trevellva, account of, iii. 237
  Trevelver, iii. 240
  Trevelyan, iv. 114
  ―――― family, iii. 117, 126, 215, 309 _bis_. Wonderful tale of their
    ancestor 309, 310. Heiress 215.――Lord Chief Justice, iv. 114, and
    family 114 _ter._
  ―――― of Nettlecombe, Somersetshire, Sir John, iii. 307, 311. Family
    307, 238
  Trevemper bridge, iii. 275
  Trevena barton, iv. 20
  Treveneage 170, 217 _bis_. Account of 170. Abounds in mines 219
  Trevener, Rev. John, i. 260
  Treveniel, ii. 229
  Trevenin tenement, iii. 223
  Trevenion barton, ii. 114
  Trevenna, i. 340
  Trevennen, account of, ii. 113
  Trevenner, Mr. ii. 414
  Trevenny parish, iv. 120
  Trevenor family, ii. 357
  Trevenson, ii. 241 _bis_
  Treveor, account of by Tonkin, ii. 113. By the Editor 114
  Treveor of Treveor, Sir Henry, ii. 113
  Treverbyn manor, i. 42. Etymology ibid.
  ―――― of Treverbyn, i. 41, 42. Hugh and Katherine 43. Walter 43, 44.
    Sir Walter 44
  ―――― burying place, i. 42
  Treveres, account of, ii. 279
  Trevernon, iii. 239
  Trevery, ii. 126――iii. 127
  Treveryan, iv. 109
  Trevethen of Porthcothen, iii. 177
  Trevethey stone, i. 194. Etymology 195
  Trevethow, iii. 9. Account of 11
  Trevia, ii. 405
  Treviderow manor, iii. 250
  Trevidror, i. 148
  Trevilan farm, chapel at, iii. 335
  Treviles or Trefilies, iv. 117
  Trevilian bridge, iii. 189
  ―――― Mr. of Devon, ii. 251. Chief Justice 153――iv. 36.――Family, iii. 216
  ―――― manor, iv. 124
  ―――― river, i. 202
  Trevilion, Mr. ii. 261, 269
  Trevill of Plymouth, i. 348
  Treville family, ii. 252, 397. Richard 252. William de 156
  Trevillian, i. 36――iii. 125. Sir John 306. Mr. 116, 124, 128. Mrs. 421
  ―――― of Basill, i. 198, 199, 200. Sir John, anecdote of 200. Peter
    198, 199. Arms 198
  ―――― of Nettlecomb, John, i. 198 _bis_, 200
  ―――― of Somersetshire family, iv. 39
  Trevillis village, iii. 348
  Trevilload, i. 348
  Trevillon, account of, i. 400
  Trevingy, Reginald, iii. 387
  Trevisa, Charles, iii. 163. John translated the Bible and other
    books 163
  ―――― John, his King Arthur, i. 337
  ―――― of Crockaddon, James, i. 313. John, translator of the Bible,
    and arms 314
  ――――’s and Tindall’s translation of the Bible, i. 121
  Trevisick, i. 11, 418
  Trevithick, account of, i. 223, 234, 416
  ―――― Richard improver of steam engine, i. 164
  Trevocar Winoe, iv. 155
  Trevor, Captain Tudor, R.N. ii. 32――iii. 186. Judge 144
  Trevorder, account of, i. 117
  ―――― Bickin, i. 117
  Trevorick, ii. 255
  Trevorike, account of, ii. 255
  Trevorter, account of, ii. 304
  Trevorva, etymology, &c., iii. 355
  ―――― of Trevorva, family and heir, iii. 356
  Trevosa barton, account of, iii. 175
  ―――― head in St. Merryn, iii. 241, 282. Interesting 180. Latitude
    and longitude 281
  ―――― manor, iii. 75, 175. Possessors of 178
  Trevygham, iii. 22
  Trevyrick, iii. 269
  Trewalda, ii. 145
  Trewan, i. 227
  Trewane, account of, ii. 338
  Trewaras head, i. 129
  Trewardevi, i. 236. Account of 237
  Trewardreath, ii. 391
  Trewardreth, by Leland, iv. 289
  Trewardreva, in Constantine, iii. 427
  Trewardruth priory, i. 307
  Trewedeneck, by Leland, iv. 272
  Treweeke barton, iv. 4, 136
  ―――― Rev. George, ii. 250.――Of Illogan and St. Minver, iii. 239,
    241. Rev. Mr. 396. Of Roach 391, 399
  Treween, i. 25
  Treweere, account of, i. 391
  Trewen manor, account of, ii. 397
  TREWEN parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, impropriation, land tax, fair, Polyvant, iv. 68. By
    Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name, name by Whitaker 69. By Editor,
    belonged to St. German’s priory, an appendix to South Petherwin,
    impropriation, and patronage, statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase 70
  Trewenethick in St. Agnes, Bartholomew, and Joan de, iii. 315
  Trewenn, i. 21. Account of 320
  ―――― parish, i. 377――iii. 335, 457
  Trewenter, ii. 427
  Trewer manor, account of, ii. 397
  Trewergy, i. 318. Account of 321
  Trewerne, Rev. Mr. of Withiel, iv. 161
  Trewhele, account of, i. 391
  Trewheler, i. 387
  Trewhella, Christopher and John, iv. 55
  Trewhelow, James, iv. 55
  Trewhythenick, account of, i. 207
  ―――― copper mill, i. 364 _bis_
  ―――― arms, i. 207
  Trewin, William, ii. 160
  Trewinard, i. 125, 344, 360. Account of 344, 349, 356. Etymology
    350――iii. 112.――House improved by Mr. C. Hawkins, i. 358.――In St.
    Earth, iii. 367
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 267
  ―――― chapel, i. 345
  ―――― i. 118, 136 _bis_, 301. Joseph 137. Arms 136.――Rev. Mr. ii. 80,
    127.――Rev. James of St. Martin’s in Meneage, iii. 124, 126, 128.
    Rev. Mr. of Mawnan 75
  ―――― of Trewinard, i. 344, 350, 351. Deiphobus, killed a man,
    obtained the royal pardon by conveying all his estates to Sir
    Reginald Mohun 345. Was tried and convicted 346. Lived on small
    stipend from Sir Reginald ibid. Tradition of the murder 356. A
    descendant of Trewinard living lately in the Strand ibid. Rev.
    James, and Sir James 350. John M.P. arrested for debt 344, 356.
    Martin 345, 350. William 350. Arms 346
  Trewince, ii. 5, 54. Account of 57, or Trefynns 133
  Trewiney, iii. 194
  Trewinn parish, iv. 50, 51
  Trewinneck, iv. 96
  Trewinnow, i. 257
  Trewinnock, i. 404
  Trewint, i. 25.――In Lesnewith, iii. 132. Account of 170
  Trewish, i. 196
  Trewithan, iii. 356――iv. 139. Account of 367
  Trewithenike, account of, i. 243 _bis_. House improved 245
  Trewithgy, Trenoweth, or Treworgy, in Probus, iii. 355, 358, 365
  Trewithian, ii. 55 _bis_. Account of 54. Its possessors 58
  Trewolla family, built a pier at Mevagissey, iii. 192.――John, ii.
    111 _ter._ Family and arms 110
  ―――― or Trewoolla of Trewoolla, or Trewolla in St. Goran, iii. 191,
    192 _bis_
  Trewollea, ii. 230
  Trewoofe manor, i. 142
  ―――― of Trewoofe, i. 142, and arms 142
  Trewoola account of, ii. 110
  Trewoolla, arms of, i. 206
  Trewoon in Budock, iii. 61
  Trewoone manor, account of, iii. 196, 197
  Treworder, i. 367
  Treworell, ii. 430
  Treworgan, i. 207. Account of 396, 403
  ―――― Vean, account of, i. 396
  Treworgy, ii. 87. _See Trewithgy_
  ―――― parish, ii. 391
  Treworgye, i. 316. Described 177
  Trework, George of Penzance, ii. 218
  Treworock, i. 418. Described 177
  Treworrell village, iii. 22
  Trewortha Vean, occupants of, iii. 188
  Treworthen, John, i. 241
  ―――― of Treworthen, Sir John, Sir Otho, and Walter, family and arms,
    iii. 269
  ―――― manor, iii. 269
  Treworthgy, ii. 429
  Treworthy, account of, iii. 383
  Treworveneth, iii. 288
  Trewother, iii. 355
  Trewothike, account of, i. 39
  Trewred manor, iv. 70
  Trewren, i. 260. Arms 237.――Rev. Richard of Withiel, iv. 162, 163
    _bis_. His wife and two daughters 163
  ―――― of Drift, Mr. and family, iii. 427
  ―――― of Tredreva in Constantine, iv. 163
  ―――― of Trewardreva, i. 237, 241――iv. 3.――Catherine, i. 376. John
    237. Rev. Richard 376
  Trewret barton, iv. 70
  Trigantan, i. 258
  Trigg, Rev. Mr. of Warliggon, iv. 128
  ―――― hundred, i. 129, 153――ii. 151, 332, 394――iii. 64, 237――iv. 42,
    44, 48, 49, 93, 95
  ―――― Major hundred, or Trigmajorshire, i. 60, 377――ii. 86, 232, 273,
    274, 402――iv. 12 _bis_, 15, 50, 101, 131.――Divided into Strathan and
    Lesnewith, iii. 22
  Trigminorshire, i. 367, 382――ii. 49, 274 _bis_, 402 _ter._――iv. 66,
    93.――Why so called, i. 60
  Trigonometrical survey, i. 149――ii. 359――iii. 98, 281, 432――iv. 31
  Trinity in Lanlivery, ii. 393
  ―――― Chantry in St. Colomb Major, i. 214
  ―――― chapel at Restormel, i. 338
  ―――― college, Cambridge, iii. 95, 188
  ―――― college, Dublin, library of, iv. 147
  ―――― college, Oxford, iii. 86, 258
  ―――― house, iii. 378.――Corporation, character of, ii. 359
  Trink, iii. 7
  Trion, St. i. 341
  Tripcony, i. 136.――John, ii. 119 _bis_, 120. Mr. 110, 414. Arms 124
  Trist, Miss, i. 401.――Rev. Jeremiah, iv. 122. Rev. S. P. J., 122,
    123 _ter._
  Triste, i. 164
  Tristram, Sir, ii. 308
  Trivalis castle, King Richard confined at, ii. 178
  Troad, Thomas, iii. 256, 350
  Trojan war, i. 342
  Trout, disquisition on the relative merits of, iii. 442
  Trove, i. 142
  Trowall or Truth well, ii. 219
  Trowbridge, of Trowbridge in Devon, Catherine and John, ii. 339
  Trowell farm, ii. 83――iii. 47
  Trowis, German, i. 192
  Trowse, i. 348
  Troy, iii. 418, 420.――Chronicles, and wars of, abridged, iv. 141
  Troyes, Lupus Bishop of, ii. 64
  Truan, account of, i. 221
  Trubody, ii. 36.――Charles, i. 44
  ―――― of Treworock, i. 177, 178
  Trungle, iii. 288
  Trewrew castle, iv. 228
  Truro, Baron, ii. 380
  ―――― borough, corporation of, ii. 81. M.P. for, Colonel John Lemon
    ibid.――John Lemon, iii. 229――iv. 33.――Kelland Courtenay, ii.
    385.――Henry Vincent, iii. 191
  ―――― bridge, iii. 207
  ―――― church, Mr. Lemon buried at, ii. 85
  ―――― manor, ii. 31
  ―――― and Tregrewe manor, in Themwyn and Truro, iii. 359
  ―――― parish, ii. 298, 301, 302, 315
  TRURO parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, sea flows to the
    walls, two manors at the conquest, iv. 70. Value of benefice,
    incorporation, patron, incumbent, land tax, arms of King John in
    the church windows, also the Prince of Wales’s plume 71. Manor and
    royalty attached to the rectory, erection of the church, no tower
    or steeple, benefice chiefly consists of voluntary subscriptions
    72. Question of its expediency, monument to John Robartes, and to
    three brothers, Dominican chapel, nunnery of Clares called Anhell,
    town a coinage town, charter of Elizabeth 73. Constitution and
    arms of the borough, form of writ, birthplace of Lord Robarts,
    fairs and cheap markets, Custom House, chief inhabitants, wealth,
    and fine buildings, Captain Upcott 74. By Tonkin and Whitaker,
    situation and boundaries, Tonkin’s etymology from Camden, rejected
    by Whitaker, a rectory, value, patron 75. Incumbent, site of the
    town, from Leland, two brooks, the three streets and three
    churches, coinage, the town a borough, the castle, small creek,
    Tonkin’s commentary on this description, and Whitaker’s on his 76.
    View from the castle, no remains of it, incorporation, seal,
    principal burgesses, mayor is also mayor of Falmouth 77. By
    Whitaker, town named from the castle, which belonged to the Earls
    of Cornwall, nothing but the mount or keep remaining, gave origin
    to the town 78. Seated on the westerly current, etymology,
    supposed rise and progress of the town 79. New way to Kenwin
    church, new bridge, anticipated act of parliament for
    improvements, church first dedicated to St. Pancras, now to St.
    Mary 80. Architecture of the church, castle later than the
    conquest, built by one of the Norman Earls, town in possession of
    Richard de Lacy a century after the conquest 81. Privileged as a
    borough, charter lost, but confirmed by Reginald Fitzroy Earl of
    Cornwall 82. The seal, the charter 83. Confirmed by Henry II. the
    mayor still mayor also of Falmouth, town has superiority over
    Falmouth harbour 84. By Editor, Truro allowed to be the first town
    in Cornwall, leads in all county concerns, the school and its
    masters, Dr. Jane, Dean of Gloucester 85. Epigram upon, Truro has
    produced Mr. Polwhele and Sir Hussey Vivian, and in the 16th
    century the learned Farnaby 86. His death, and works, Boyle’s
    character of him 87. Several families have made large fortunes
    there, the Robarteses Earls of Radnor, the Vincents 88. Mr.
    Gregor, Mr. Lemon, Mr. Coster, Mr. Daniel, Mr. Vivian, Mr. Hussey
    89. Mr. Thomas, Samuel Foote, tragedy in his mother’s family of
    which he published a narrative, the two Landers, a monument to one
    90. Mr. Charles Warrick invented and used the paddle wheel for
    boats, modern changes, specimen 91. Statistics, rector, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 92
  Truro river, i. 202――ii. 33
  ―――― new road, iii. A 89.――Road from Redruth, ii. 304
  ―――― school, ii. 355
  ―――― town, i. 58 _bis_, 77, 84, 177――ii. 2, 17, 34, 84, 304, 318,
    354, 379, 381, 388――iii. 16, 18, 38, 189, 196, 324 _bis_, 367――iv.
    30, 167. A coinage town, ii. 301. Ferry to 212. Passage from
    Falmouth to 226. Road to Falmouth from 304.――Road to Helston from,
    iv. 4.――Ships obliged to go up to, ii. 9. The old part is in Kenwyn
    parish 317. Assizes removed to 431. People of 85. Road through to
    Falmouth 104.――A family of, iii. 213
  Truru, by Leland, iv. 272
  Truthan, account of, i. 396, 403
  Truthon, i. 398 _bis_
  Try, ii. 124
  Trywardreth river, source of, iv. 237
  Tubb, Agnes and Charles, ii. 395. Family ibid.――iii. 129 _bis_
  Tubby, i. 276 _bis_, 277 _quat._
  Tuckfield, John, ii. 296
  Tudor, Mary, iii. 369. House of 370.――Race of, ii. 381
  ―――― times, ii. 114――iii. 8
  Tudy, St. i. 129, 131
  ―――― St. manor, iv. 97
  ―――― St. parish, iv. 44
  TUDY, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, antiquity,
    value of benefice, incumbent, land tax, history of St. Udith,
    reproved for her fine dress, her answer, iv. 93. Hengar, Penvose,
    Dameliock castle 94. The castle defaced, Billing family 95. By
    Tonkin, situation, boundaries, value of benefice, patron, incumbents
    ibid. Tinten manor, Tynten family 96. By Editor, splendid monuments
    in the church, one to Mr. A. Nicoll, St. Editha, died early at
    Wilton, was very self-denying, Canute’s opinion of her ibid. The
    opening of her tomb convinced him, patrons of the benefice, present
    incumbent, soil, face of the land, the manor, and those of Tinten
    and Kellygreen, Tremeer, Sir William Lower’s works 97. Those of Dr.
    Lower his brother, description of Hengar and the scenery around,
    statistics, and Geology by Dr. Boase 98
  Tue, St. i. 251, 294
  Tunbridge, ii. 295
  ―――― castle, ii. 424
  Tunnel rock, iii. 36
  Turbervill, James, Bishop of Exeter, i. 108, 109
  Turks, i. 130, 411 _bis_――iv. 148.――War with, ii. 371. Subdued
    Constantinople 365. Conspired with Demetrius Paleolagus 366
  Turner, Francis, Bishop of Ely, iii. 299
  Turner’s wear, ii. 1, 17 _bis_
  Turvey, ii. 292
  Tutbury castle, Staffordshire, ii. 89
  Twickenham, Pope’s grotto at, iii. 53
  Twysden, Judge, ii. 5
  Tybesta, i. 253, 256, 258, 297. Described 253
  ―――― chapel, i. 253
  ―――― manor, iii. 195
  Tyburn, ii. 191
  Tye family, iii. 90
  Tyer family, iii. 84
  Tyes, Sir Henry le, Lord T. (or de Tiers), iii. 314
  Tyhiddy, ii. 235 _bis_, 239 _ter._ Account of by Hals 235. By Tonkin
    238, 239. By the Editor 240
  Tyhiddy downs, ii. 235
  Tyncombe, Mr. ii. 43.――Rev. Mr. iv. 110
  Tyndall’s Bible, iii. 163 _bis_
  Tyne river, i. 2.90
  Tyngmouth river, source of, iv. 237
  Tynnyherne, ii. 430
  Tyntagell castle, iv. 228
  Tynten, John de, _ter._ and family, iv. 96
  Typpet of St. Colomb, Matthew, Richard, and arms, iv. 139
  Tywardreath, or Tywardreth monastery, iii. 7――ii. 9
  Tywardreth, or Tywardreath parish, i. 52, 167――ii. 36, 44, 88, 89
    _bis_, 92, 390――iii. 55, 56
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 275
  TYWARDRETH parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, and land tax, the
    priory alien, iv. 99. History of the saints Sergius and Bacchus,
    founders of the abbey, dedicated to St. Andrew, his history 100.
    Alien priories suppressed, this an exception, its revenues at the
    general dissolution, account of Menabilly 101. Castle Dore 102. By
    Tonkin, situation, late incumbent, value of benefice, manor,
    belonged time of Henry IV. to the Champernowns, given by the
    conqueror to Robert, Earl of Morton, Leland’s description of the
    town, &c., 102. By the Editor, antiquity of the church and its
    tower, interior decorations, alteration of churches, the different
    purposes to which they are now destined, the monastery has
    disappeared 103. Description from the foundations, which could be
    discovered by digging 104. Charter, the convent seal, St. Andrew’s
    relics brought to Abernethy in Scotland, now St. Andrew’s, priory
    suppressed with other alien houses, but re-established,
    correspondence between Thomas Cromwell and the last prior 105.
    Preserved at Wardour, its nature 106. History of the manor,
    Menabilly, Rashleigh family 107. Mr. Rashleigh’s collection of
    minerals, and published account of them, with a geological plate,
    representing a stream-work, destroyed soon after, his grotto and
    death 108. Polkerris, improvements in, Kilmarth, Treveryan,
    statistics, vicar, patron 109. Geology by Dr. Boase, mines of
    Lanescot, and Fowey consols 110
  ―――― priory, ii. 45, 113――iii. 56, 232 _quat._――iv. 62, 64, 127.――The
    manor taken from, ii. 46; or abbey, its founder, dedicated to St.
    Andrew, not suppressed, iv. 101. Communication respecting it in
    the Gentleman’s Magazine, suppressed, but re-established 105.
    Extracts from its calendar 106.――Prior of, i. 41, 42, 52, 414――ii.
    36, 38, 89――iii. 195――iv. 63 _bis_, 64; or abbot 99 _bis_. List of
    the priors 106.――Curious letter to one, ii. 47
  Tywarnhaile manor, i. 12――iii. 316, 327. Account of 313. House 314
  ―――― Tier’s manor, iii. 313 _bis_, 314, 316, 327. Account of 314
  Tywarnhayle, ii. 130
  Tywednick parish, ii. 257 _bis_, 258 _bis_
  Tywidneck, iv. 164
  Tywoodreth river, source of, iv. 237

  Udith, or Udye, St. her history, disputation with Bishop Ethelwold
    about female attire, iv. 93. Her brother Edward the martyr, her
    death, built St. Denis’s church at Wilton, called the younger, her
    aunt was another St. Udith 94
  Udnow Parva, iii. 306
  Udy, i. 61
  ―――― St. iv. 42
  Udye, St. parish, i. 60――iii. 64, 222
  Uffa, Lieutenant of Devonshire, iii. 415
  Ugbere, or Ogbere tenement, iv. 41
  Ulette, St. i. 341
  Ulex nanus, iv. 54
  Ulster, king of arms, iv. 144
  Umphravill, Mr. ii. 146.――Alicia, and John, her husband, iii. 140.
    Family, ib.
  Underhill, Thomas, ii. 192
  Union, Scotch, i. 126
  United Kingdom, various measures in, iii. 433
  ―――― States, iii. 89
  Universal history, ii. 368
  Unwena, Bishop of Dorchester, iv. 137
  Uny, St. iii. 5 _bis_, 7 _ter._, 384 _bis_. Buried at Lelant 7.――Or
    Unan, name explained, iv. 313
  Uny, Lelant parish, iii. 5
  Upcott, George and Jonathan, i. 45.――Joseph of Morval, iv. 187.
    William of Truro, ib. Captain William, memoir of 74
  Upton barton overwhelmed in sand, ii. 149
  ―――― Nicholas, iii. 437――iv. 71.――His MS. of heraldry, i. 170,
    338――ii. 107――iv. 71.――Family, iii. 38 _bis_, 148――iv. 156
  ―――― of Upton and Colombton, iv. 156
  ―――― of St. Winow, heir of, iv. 156
  ―――― de re Militari, iv. 141
  Urban, Mr. iii. 143
  Urchuarth, Miss, i. 244
  Urlick, Mr. and Mr. iii. 88
  Urns, found at Dance-Meyns, i. 141. At Trembleth 405
  Urny, St. iii. 461
  Uro, R. iv. 79
  Ursan of Richardock, i. 330 _bis_, 331, 332
  Ursula, St. story and picture of, i. 195
  Ursula’s, St. tomb, i. 195
  Ushant, ii. 246
  Usher’s, Archbishop, iii. 331, 332.――Brit. Eccles. Antiq. &c. i. 83,
    321.――“De Christ. Eccles.” &c. iii. 257.――His account of St. Kebius,
    ii. 338
  Ustick, i. 144, 371, 376 _bis_. Oliver 145.――Family, iii.
    216.――Stephen, iv. 4
  ―――― of Bideford, Michael, i. 375
  ―――― of Botallock, ii. 285 _bis_
  ―――― of Lea, Oliver, i. 376
  ―――― of Pendavy, Richard, i. 376
  ―――― of Pendevey, Mrs. iv. 163
  ―――― of Penzance, Mr. ii. 34
  Usticke, Rev. Mr. iii. 77. Miss 85
  Uter Pendragon, King, i. 326, 339, 342――iv. 94.――His history, i.
    326. Death 332. Arms 326
  Uthno manor, iii. 307 _bis_
  Uxellodunum, iii. 25 _bis_.――Mentioned by Cæsar, ii. 237
  Uzella, iii. 24 _bis_, 25, 26
  ―――― river, iii. 24

  Vabe, La, or St. parish, _see Mabe_
  Vacye tenement, iv. 41
  Val river, i. 74, 294, 297. Attempts of Mr. Trevanion to make it
    navigable 298
  Valancey bridge, ii. 50
  Vale river, i. 242, 253, 256, 258――ii. 1 _ter._, 17, 24, 298――iii.
    402 _bis_
  ―――― Royal abbey, Cheshire, iii. 232
  Valemouth, ii. 1
  Valerian, Emperor, i. 88
  Valerianus, Emperor, iii. 434
  Valgenow, ii. 1
  Valle, abbey de, i. 300 _bis_
  Valletort, Valitort, or Valletorta, i. 36. Joan, ib. Reginald de 42.
    Roger de Lord of Trematon castle 296.――Jane de, ii. 8. Joan de 109.
    Reginald de 119.――Joan de, iii. 448.――Roger de, iv. 41, 77, 82
  Valmune, ii. 1
  Valor Beneficiorum, ii. 30, 34, 86, 89, 232, 273――iv. 185
  ―――― Ecclesiasticus, ii. 412――iii. 253, 278, 453 _ter._――iv. 4, 5, 69
  Valuba, supposed to be Falmouth, ii. 20
  Valubia, i. 28
  Van Tromp defeated by Blake, and his subsequent victory, ii.
    25.――His death 27
  Vandals, i. 334
  Vandower, taken by the English, ii. 177
  Vane, Sir Henry, i. 314
  Vann family, iv. 121
  Vanstort, ii. 153
  Varfull, account of, iii. 44
  Vasnoom, Rev. Mr. ii. 384
  Vatican at Penzance, iii. 89
  Vaughan, Rev. Thomas, i. 300.――John, iii. 185. Mr. 166
  ―――― of Ottery, John, i. 39. Arms 39
  ―――― of Trewothick and Ottery, i. 371
  Vaultershome, iii. 107
  Vaux of Northamptonshire, family, iii. 404, 405
  Vaye, St. manor, iii. 222
  Vaynfleet, Oller, iv. 55
  Veal, Mr. ii. 150.――Family, iv. 54
  Veale family, and George, ii. 124. Rev. Mr. 124 _bis_. Rev. Mr. the
    first protestant vicar of Gulval 124.――George, iii. 88. Mr. 82.
    Family 94, 286.――Sampson, iv. 55. Rev. W. of Zennar 166
  ―――― of Trevarla, George and Mr. iii. 91
  Vean, John, Robert, iii. 387
  Veep, or Veepe, St. parish, i. 319――ii. 394, 409――iv. 155, 159
  VEEP, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, impropriation,
    founder of church, ancient name, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, impropriation, iv. 110. Land tax, Priory of Carock, St.
    Pile, Walter of Exeter lived there, wrote the Life of Guy Earl of
    Warwick, different opinions of the historian, new house, burying
    place converted into a garden, Botowne 111. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, ib. A vicar, value, patron, impropriation, manor of
    Manely 112. By Editor, situation of the church, monuments, St.
    Syriac priory, for two monks only, and St. Currie church ibid.
    Revenue of the priory, St. Cyric’s Creek, the saint buried on the
    site now called St. Cadix, the history of Earl Guy 113. Trevelyan,
    the family seated in Somersetshire, and have lost half this estate,
    several manors mentioned by Lysons, besides Manely Coleshill,
    patronage of the benefice, present incumbent 114. Part of King
    Charles’s army here at the surrender of Fowey, statistics, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 115
  Velhuish, Mr. ii. 97
  Vellawrance, iii. 343
  Vellownoweth, iii. 319
  Venables, iii. 85
  Venetians attacked Patras, ii. 369. Sale of Thessalonica to 366. Sir
    Henry Killigrew, ambassador to 372
  Venice, iii. 187
  Vennefire, ii. 209
  Venning, Richard, iv. 18
  Venton, ii. 1――iv. 41
  Venus, planet, transit of, observed, iii. 19.――By Dr. Maskelyne, ii.
    222.――Observation interrupted by a storm, iv. 11
  Verbena chamoidryoides, iv. 183
  ―――― pulchella, iv. 183
  Vere, John de, i. 262. John, Earl of Oxford 402. John 12th Earl,
    John 14th Earl, Richard 11th Earl, and Sir Robert 262.――Aubrey,
    son of the 12th Earl of Oxford, attainted, and beheaded, ii. 182.
    George, brother of the 13th Earl 185. Earls of Oxford, Richard
    11th, John 12th 181 _bis_. Opposed the precedence of the spiritual
    lords 181. Attainted and beheaded 182. John 13th, adhered to Henry
    6th at the battle of Barnet, fled to Mount’s bay ibid. Entered it
    by stratagem 183. Twice repulsed Edward’s forces 184. Capitulated,
    confined at Hamms, returned with Henry 7th, killed at Bosworth
    185. John 14th, and his arms, ib. Richard, and Aubrey, last Earl
    195.――Richard de 11th Earl, iii. 65, 274. Family of the Earls of
    Oxford 258
  ―――― river in Herts, iv. 79
  Vergilia capensis, iv. 183
  Verian, Veryan, or St. Verian parish, ii. 50――iii. 198, 282, 402,
    403, 404, 451――iv. 116
  Verman, i. 387――ii. 25. Family 357. Monuments to in Lamaran church
    357.――Miss, iv. 116
  Vernoil, ii. 179
  Vernon, Judge, iii. 144
  Veronica, St. i. 315
  Verstegan, i. 302――ii. 236, 320.――His rhyme, iv. 128.――Richard, i. 264
  Verulam, the ancient name of St. Alban’s, ii. 64
  Veryan limestone, iv. 123 _bis_
  VERYAN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, iv. 115. Ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, land tax, name of Elerchy, history
    of the Trevanion family 116. And of Robins, with their arms, manors
    of Treviles and Govile 117. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation,
    boundaries, name, history of St. Symphorian, a vicarage, value ibid.
    Patron, incumbent, impropriation, ancient name, manor of Elerchy,
    etymology 118. By Whitaker, name derived from the manorial house,
    its situation ibid. The mills, derivation of the name, dissertation
    on the use of imagination in antiquarian researches ibid. Saint,
    corruption of his name, parish feast 120. The church tower a later
    addition 121. By Editor, the manor, impropriators and patrons ibid.
    Three vicars related, the parish mentioned in an old charter,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 122. And by the Editor 123. Mr.
    Trist’s account of the limestone, Pendower beach, analysis of the
    stone by Mr. Gregor, much superior to the Plymouth limestone ibid.
    Good for cement, contains iron, Mr. Greenough’s map 124
  Veryon, ii. 79
  Vespasian, Emperor, i. 198
  Vestia lycioides, iv. 283
  Vetorio Capelli, a Venetian general, ii. 369
  Veye, St. i. 328
  Vibart of Gulval, ii. 83. Isabel 83
  Vibert, Mr. a benefactor to the church at Penzance, iii. 93
  Victor 2nd Pope, i. 110 _bis_
  Victory man of war, wreck of, iv. 174
  Viel, heir of, iii. 279
  Vienna, Christendom preserved by John Sobieski, under the walls of,
    ii. 351
  Vignierius, i. 192
  Vigures, Hugh, ii. 423
  Ville Frank, taken by the English, iv. 177
  Villie, De, i. 296
  Villiers, Harriet, and John Earl Grandison, i. 69.――Barbara, Duchess
    of Cleveland, ii. 11. George Duke of Buckingham 382
  Vincent, i. 18, 292. Henry and S. V., 54.――John and Matthias, ii.
    227. Walter, killed Mr. George Killigrew, was tried and acquitted 5.
    Died suddenly 6. Walter 316. Mr. 227. Mrs. aunt of Mr. Tonkin 98.
    Arms, and story of them 227.――Family, made a fortune at Truro, iv.
    88. Represented it in parliament, lived at Tresimple, have
    disappeared 89
  ―――― of St. Allen, i. 205
  ―――― of Creed, ii. 90
  ―――― of Nantellon, John, i. 257
  ―――― of Stoke Dabernon, Surrey, family and arms, ii. 227
  ―――― of Trelevan family, iii. 192, 193.――Henry, ii. 55
  ―――― of Tresimple, Edward, Henry, Jane, Mary, Peter, Shadrack,
    Walter _bis_, and arms, i. 205.――Henry, ii. 317――iii. 188, 328. Mary
    188. Walter 328
  ―――― of Trigowethan, Walter, iii. 319
  ―――― of Truro, Edward, iii. 238. Nicholas 192. Walter 192, 327 _bis_
  Vinicombe, John, biography of, iii. 87
  Vinsam, Richard, i. 272, 275
  Virgil, notes on, iv. 87
  Virgin Mary, ii. 2, 96 _bis_――iv. 132. Truro church, dedicated to 75
  Virginia, Sir Richard Grenville undertakes to people, ii. 342
  ―――― fleet, the Dutch attempt to capture, its cargo landed at Foy,
    ii. 42
  Vivian, i. 74, 222. Sir Hussey 173. John 2, 215. Matthew 2. Sir
    Richard 222. Thomas, prior of Bodmin 75, 233. Bishop of Megara 75.
    Tomb 75, 95, 101. His official arms 75. Family arms 76, 94.――Edward,
    ii. 303. General Sir Hussey 34. His ancestors lived at Comprigney
    318. Jane 304. Ralph 398. Rev. Mr. 34.――Francis and Mary, iii. 135.
    Richard 387. Thomas, prior of St. Petroc’s, Bodmin, and Bishop of
    Megara in Greece 279――iv. 160.――Mr. iii. 147.――Sir Hussey originated
    from Truro, iv. 86. John 89. Family 139
  ―――― of Pencalerick, iii. 341.――Mr. iv. 89
  ―――― of Trelowarren, iv. 160
  ―――― of Trenowith, ii. 303
  ―――― of Trenowth in St. Colomb, ii. 335 _bis_. Thomas 335
  ―――― of Truan, i. 221, 383, 408. Anne 221, 222. Francis 216, 221,
    222. Jane 221, 222. John 216 _bis_, 221 _ter._, 222 _bis_. Mary 211,
    222 _bis_. Thomas 216, 221 _bis_, 222. Capt. Thomas 211. Arms
    222.――Family, ii. 43――iii. 148 _bis_――iv. 138 _bis_, 160 _bis_.
  Vivyan of Tollskiddy, ii. 255
  Volant, John de, ii. 209
  Voluba, i. 256
  Vorch, St. ii. 391 _bis_
  Vosper, i. 142――ii. 300.――Arthur, i. 142, 143.――John, iii.
    16.――Etymology, i. 143
  Vowell, i. 108
  Voysey, John, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 195
  Vyel of Trevorder, Miss, iii. 134
  Vyell, i. 117
  ―――― of Trevorder, i. 250. Julyan and William 378
  Vyvyan, i. 117, 209. Francis 248. Sir Vyell 101. Sir Francis and
    Jane, ii. 320. Sir Richard, M.P. for Cornwall 351.――Sir Francis, iv. 162
  Vyvyan of Cosowarth, in Little Colan, Mary, iii. 136
  ―――― of Merthin, Charles, i. 136. Sir Richard 136, 241
  ―――― of Trelowarren, i. 65, 148, 237. Jane 357. Sir Richard 211,
    357, 391.――Hannibal, Sir Francis, Sir Richard and Sir Vyell, all
    successively governors of St. Mawe’s castle, Sir Richard displaced
    from the government by Cromwell, ii. 277.――Ann, born in the Tower,
    iii. 136. Barbara 342. Carew 136. Sir Carew 337. Charles 135.
    Francis, built the house at Trelowarren 134. Sir Francis 314 _bis_,
    315 _bis_. Hannibal 134. Harriet 337. John 342. Michael 134. Philip
    137, 337 _ter._ Richard 134 _ter._ Richard 136 _bis_. Sir Richard
    135 _ter._ Sir Richard, a cavalier 135. Sent to the Tower, had time
    to destroy his papers, afterwards M.P. for Cornwall 136. Sir Richard
    seized by Mr. Boscawen 217. Sir Richard 337. Sir Richard R. his
    election for Bristol 137. Vyel 136, 137, 337. Sir Vyell 134, 135.
    Sir Vyell and his daughter 446. Five Misses 135. Mr. pupil of Dr.
    Borlase 53. Mr. 133, 337. Rev. Mr. 97. Family 44, 134 _bis_, 135
    _bis_, 216, 250, 258. Arms 135.――Sir R. R., Rev. Vyal of Withiel
    _bis_, and family, iv. 163

  Wadder family, iv. 17
  Waddon, i. 167.――Family, iii. 255. Monuments to ibid.
  ―――― of Tonacombe in Morwinstow, memorials of in Kilkhampton church,
    ii. 347
  Wade, general, i. 56
  Wadebridge, i. 115, 351, 375. Account of 372, 376. Erection 373.
    Fund for repair 374
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 259
  ―――― parish, ii. 256――iii. 324――iv. 46
  Wadebrygge, iv. 255
  Wadham college, Oxford, ii. 377, 389――iii. 20, 251
  ―――― Joseph, iii. 20. William 116. Family, founders of Wadham
    college, Oxford 20
  ―――― of Merrifield, John, ii. 110 _bis_
  Wadland, William, iii. 176
  Wager, Admiral Sir Charles, iv. 21, 36. Bond gives his history 37
  ―――― ship, loss of, iii. 205
  Wakefield, battle of, iii. 294
  Walburge, St. daughter of St. Richard, iv. 126. Little recorded of
    127. Church dedicated at Chester to 125. At Bristol 127
  Walcot, Dr. John, memoir of, iii. 219. His verses on Lieutenant
    Boscawen 220
  Waldegrave, Hon. Edward, monument to, ii. 325
  Wales, i. 307, 330, 334, 373――ii. 127――iii. 277, 336 _bis_, 340,
    460.――St. German travelled through, ii. 65 _bis_. Tin and copper ore
    carried into to be separated 303
  ―――― Prince of, ii. 376, 408――iv. 12, 19, 62, 72.――David, i.
    339.――Frederick, i. 69――ii. 84.――Joan, Princess, iii. 27.――-His
    plume, iv. 71, 78
  ―――― North, i. 294
  ―――― North Nesta, Princess of, and Rosse, Prince of, i. 34
  Walesborough, Walesbreu, Walesbury, or Whalesborough, John, iii.
    116. Mark de 307. Thomas, Thomas 116. Family 115. Arms 116.――Family,
    iv. 39
  Walesbury, or Walesborough, or Whalesborough manor, iii. 307.
    Account of 115, 117
  Walfi, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Walker, Rev. S. M., i. 392.――Rev. James, ii. 85. Rev. Robert, vicar
    of St. Winnow 34――iv. 158 _bis_.――Rev. Robert, anecdote of, iii. 4
  ―――― of Exeter, i. 369――ii. 170
  ―――― of Lanlivery, Mr. ii. 34
  Waller, Sir William, the parliamentary general, ii. 343
  Wallingford castle, iii. 285――iv. 9, 17
  ―――― honour, iii. 44, 286――iv. 9, 17, 97, 127
  ―――― manor, ii. 89, 113
  Wallington, iii. 26
  Wallis, Rev. John, i. 96. Captain, R.N., 359――ii. 99. The discoverer
    of Otaheite 270. The circumnavigator 405. Betty, his only dau.,
    270.――Christopher, notice of, iii. 446. John, Captain Samuel, R.N.
    family, and their monuments 440
  Walocus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Walpole, i. 151. Sir Robert 265, 284. George Earl of Orford, his
    deed of entail, Robert Earl of Orford 313. Sir Robert 84,
    313.――George, Earl of Orford, iii. 230. Horace 117.――Family 254, and
    iv. 62
  Walsh, James, iv. 67
  Walsingham, St. Mary of, ii. 75
  Walter, Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, ii. 180 _bis_.――Mary, iii.
    337. Family 254
  Walton court, iii. 155
  Walveden of Walveden, Catherine and John, and Miss, iii. 357. Family
    357, 365
  ―――― manor, iii. 356
  Warbeck, Perkin, ii. 186 _bis_, 187 _bis_, 189, 190 _quint._――iii.
    433.――Saluted King of England, ii. 188. Takes sanctuary at Beauly,
    submits 190. Pardoned, afterwards escaped 191
  Warborough, iv. 125. The Editor thinks it resembles the Roman works
    in Dorsetshire 126
  Warbstow parish, iii. 275――iv. 59, 61 _quat._
  WARBSTOW parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, iv.
    124. Consolidated with Trenegles, patron, incumbent 125. By Tonkin
    and Whitaker, situation, boundaries, name, saint, Chester Cathedral
    dedicated to her, attached to Treneglos, incumbent, Warborough
    fortification, from which, says Whitaker, the name is derived ibid.
    By Editor, this part abounds in military antiquities ibid.
    Surprising how armies could have been provisioned, has seen this
    entrenchment, much larger than those in Cornwall generally, the
    saint’s history, and of her relation St. Boniface 126. He invented
    the letter W, a church dedicated to St. Walburga at Bristol,
    impropriator, patron, Fentrigan manor, Donneny manor, statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 127
  Warburg, St. iv. 125
  Warburton, William, Bishop of Gloucester, ii. 265, 266.――Dr.
    William, iii. 67, 68 _quint._, 69
  Ward, Simon, brewer to King Arthur, i. 131.――Dr. Seth, Bishop of
    Exeter, consecrated Falmouth church, ii. 4
  Wardour castle, Wilts, iv. 106
  Ware’s History of Ireland, iv. 145. MSS. 147
  Warinus, ii. 427
  Warlegan parish, ii. 239. Warleggon 167, 168. Warliggan 89――iv. 48,
    49.――Warligon, iii. 260
  WARLEGGON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Trengove, and
    family, iv. 128. Their arms 129. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation,
    boundaries, etymology, value, patron, incumbent, manor ibid. By
    Editor, descent of the manor and patronage of the living, manor of
    Carborro, the church and tower injured by lightning, general
    carelessness in neglecting the simple security against lightning
    130. Statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 131
  Warlewast, Robert, iii. 456.――William, Bishop of Exeter, i. 27,
    95――ii. 87――iii. 456, 457, 458.――Founder of Launceston priory, ii.
    419, 428. His deed of gift to it 426. Buried at Plympton priory,
    suppressed St. Stephen’s collegiate church 419
  Warliggon manor, iv. 128. Account of 129
  Warne, Rev. Mr. i. 246, 250.――Lawsuit between two brothers, ii. 253.
    Lost the whole estate 254
  Warr, Joan, iii. 60
  Warren, Maria Lukey, i. 403. Thomas 10.――David, iii. 387. William 239
  ―――― a Roman fort, description of, iii. 365
  Warrick, Charles, his character, and anticipation of the machinery
    of steam-boats, iv. 91
  Warrington, i. 107
  Wars, French, of Edward 3rd, i. 85
  Warton, Thomas, ii. 266.――Mr. iv. 141
  ――――’s History of English Poetry, iv. 113
  Warwick castle, iv. 114
  Warwick, Earl of, i. 168――iii. 73.――Guy, iv. 111, 113.――Thomas, i.
    341.――Beauchamp, ii. 130. Richard Neville 38. Richard 182 _ter._
  Wash in Lincolnshire, iii. 10
  Wastrell downs, i. 239
  Water, high, time of, at various points, iii. 375
  Waterloo, battle, Sir Hussey Vivian shared the glories of, iv. 86
  ―――― bridge, built of Cornwall stone, iii. 63
  Watson, Bishop, iv. 45
  Waunford, Thomas de, iv. 13; or Waurnford family and coheir 16
  Wayne, William, iii. 426
  Wayte, William, i. 243. Arms 244
  ―――― of Lestwithiel, i. 243
  ―――― of Trewenethick, William, iii. 324 _bis_
  Webb, John, ii. 196
  Webber, Jonathan and arms, ii. 336.――Edy, iii. 387. Joseph 362.
    Thomas 181, 387
  Wedgewood, Josiah, and Mrs. iii. 34.――Mr. procured soap rock from
    Lammoran parish, ii. 360
  Wednock, St. iv. 53
  Week St. Mary, near Stratton, a tower at, iii. 363
  WEEK ST. MARY, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value,
    patron, land tax, iv. 131. Thomasine Bonaventure, her history,
    obscure birth, she falls in with a London merchant 132. Goes with
    him to London as his servant, afterwards marries him, and is early
    left a rich widow, her second marriage and widowhood 133. Marries
    thirdly, is Lady Mayoress, in her third widowhood lived piously and
    charitably, founded a chantry and school in this parish 134.
    Dissolved by Edward 6th, two fairs 135. By Editor, church
    conspicuous, tower nearly the most lofty in Cornwall, town large,
    etymology of Week, lines on _sweet saints_ ibid. Town called a
    borough, manor merged in that of Swannacot, manor of East Orchard
    Mauvais, Castle-hill, advowson, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 136
  Weekly Miscellany, i. 283
  Weights, stone, found in Castle Dinas, i. 228
  Well, medicinal, i. 160
  Wellington, Duke, iv. 86, 159
  Wells, insurgent advance to, i. 86. Proceed from 87.――See removed
    to, iv. 36
  Welscomb, Thomas, i. 290
  Welsh bards, iii. 431.――Jones’s Relics of, ii. 166
  ―――― people, i. 307
  ―――― princes, iii. 336
  ―――― stone coal, iv. 123
  ―――― tongue, i. 337
  ―――― victory over the Picts, ii. 65
  Wen, de, iii. 214
  ―――― St. parish, sheaf of, ii. 44
  Wena, St. Bishop of Winchester, iv. 137
  Wenap, St ii. 129, 132 _bis_
  WENAP parish. _See Gwenap_
  Wenca, i. 2
  Wendron church, iii. 447.――St. Wendron, ii. 136, 137――St. Wendrone,
    iv. 5
  WENDRON parish. _See Gwendron_
  ―――― parish, i. 261.――St. Wendron, ii. 160.――St. Wendrone, iii. 5
  ―――― St. vicarage, ii. 138
  Wendyn, Robert, i. 313
  Wenheder, i. 2
  Wenn, St. iv. 160
  ―――― church, i. 74――iii. 188
  ―――― parish, i. 115, 212.――iii. 391, 395――iv. 163
  WENN, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, the only
    parish in Cornwall with the prefix of saint in Domesday Book, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land tax, iv. 137.
    Tower and bells struck down by lightning, Tregury family, Michael,
    Archbishop of Dublin, his Latin epitaph, mistranslated by Hals,
    Lancorla barton 138. The dwelling of Mr. Hals, the manor of Lancorla
    and of Checkenock, Trewithan 139. Damelsa castle and house,
    Treganatha, fairs at 140. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, saint, a
    vicarage, value, patron, incumbent, manor of Borlase ibid. Family of
    Norman origin, disputed by Whitaker 141. By Editor, Great Skewish,
    Skewish family, one of them compiled the wars of Troy temp. Henry
    6th, Archbishop Tregury. Editor’s communication with Dean Dawson,
    the Archbishop’s tomb restored by Swift ibid. Engraving of the tomb
    142. Editor’s letter to the Gentleman’s Magazine with it, antiquity
    and vigour of that work, history of the Archbishop nearly lost,
    noticed by Lysons, successive possessors of the estate, tomb seen by
    a Cornish gentleman, application to the Dean 143. Records of the
    Dublin prelates, &c. lost, preservation of the tomb, Wood’s mention
    of the Archbishop as governor of the newly founded college of Caen
    144. Memoir of him from Ware’s History of Ireland 145. Said to have
    been taken prisoner at sea, doubted, certain persons excommunicated
    for laying violent hands on him, his death 146. Monument described,
    preserved, his will 147. Celebration of a jubilee at Rome, dreadful
    fatality from the crowds, Tregury ordered a fast of three days in
    his diocese, his works, documents respecting the restoration of his
    temporalities 148. Parish statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 151
  Wenna, i. 2.――A female saint, iv. 140
  Wennack, St. iii. 37
  Wennow, St. parish, i. 112.――St. Wenow, ii. 41――iv. 110
  Wensent, i. 2
  Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, iii. 152
  Werrington, i. 266.――Barton, iii. 283, 459 _quat._ Possessors of 460
  ―――― manor, iv. 64 _bis_
  ―――― parish, iii. 456, 459 _quat._, 460――iv. 152
  Werstanus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Wescombe, Robert, iii. 153
  Wesley, John, preached in Gwenap pit, ii. 133
  Wessy, St. ii. 412
  West, John, iii. 387. Colonel John 419
  ―――― of Redruth, Udy, ii. 239
  ―――― of England Architecture, iv. 16
  ―――― hundred, i. 112, 167, 174, 316――ii. 291, 394, 409――iii. 13, 118,
    245, 260, 291, 347――iv. 19, 23, 110, 111, 128, 129, 155, 184
  ―――― Indies, regular communication of Falmouth with, ii. 18. Mr.
    Knill’s mission to 266. Ship supposed to have made for when driven
    to the Cornish coast 268
  ―――― Looe, Mr. Daniell, M.P. for, ii. 318
  ―――― Saxon Kings, iii. 139
  ―――― Saxons, Kingill, King of, ii. 284.――St. Richard, King of, iv. 126
  ―――― North, account of, i. 319
  Westbury of Winston Westbury, Edward, i. 400
  Westcot, iii. 163
  ―――― down, iv. 18
  Western circuit, ii. 227. Lawyers of 53
  ―――― lighthouse, its latitude and longitude, ii. 359
  Westlake of Elmsworthy, ii. 347. The last of the family died in
    destitution, twice pricked for Sheriff while in the poorhouse 347.
    Memorials in Kilkhampton church ibid.
  Westmacott, the sculptor, iii. 229
  Westminster, i. 345――ii. 403――iii. 242
  ―――― abbey, i. 170――iii. 65, 167.――Monuments in, iv. 38
  ―――― abbot of, ii. 149
  ―――― hall, ii. 190, 191, 192――iii. 131. The Bishops tried in 296
  ―――― school, iii. 296, 300
  ―――― statute, ii. 4
  Weston, William, English prior of the Knights of Malta, i.
    411.――Stephen, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 40. Judge 144.――Mr. and
    Bishop, iv. 118
  Wetherall, Sir Charles, ii. 162
  Weymouth, sea fight near, ii. 26
  Whaddon, i. 104
  Whalesborough family, iv. 114. _See Walesborough_
  Wharton’s History of English Poetry, i. 342
  ――――’s London, i. 251
  Wheal tower mine, ii. 33
  Wheare, Degory, his history and works, ii. 233
  Whele, Alfred, i. 143――iii. 345
  ―――― Etherson, i. 414
  ―――― Fortune, ii. 83, 219――Copper, iii. 47
  ―――― Reath, tin, account of, iii. 113
  ―――― Treliston, ii. 143
  ―――― Vor, i. 127, 128――iii. 13, 447
  Wherry mine, account of, iii. 99
  Whetstone, iv. 54
  Whetton, Samuel, i. 112
  Whichcott, Colonel Christopher, commissioner for the parliament
    army, iv. 189
  Whigs were joined by George I. and George II. the battle of Culloden
    caused their fall, ii. 244
  Whitaker, Rev. John, i. 96.――Some particulars of his Life, rector of
    Ruan Lanyhorne, iii. 406. His literary character 407.――His history
    of Cornwall, ii. 123, 127, 143, 153, 199, 231, 240, 254 _bis_, 255,
    273, 274――iii. 278, 292, 302, 321, 348, 363, 364 _ter._, 365, 366,
    398 _bis_, 399. His style, &c., 342.――His remarks upon Truro castle
    and town, iv. 78. General remarks at the end of the work 167.――Mr.
    i. 73
  Whitaker’s cathedrals of Cornwall, i. 299
  Whitchurch, Ranulph de, iv. 16
  White, i. 266.――John and Robert, ii. 300. Rev. Mr. 151.――Thomas,
    Bishop of Peterborough, one of the seven, iii. 299
  White’s “Natural History of Selborne,” iii. 206
  White Friars, house at Truro, iv. 76, 79
  ―――― works mine, ii. 302
  Whitechapel, iii. 188
  Whitechurch parish, near Tavistock, iii. 390
  Whiteford barton, iv. 9, 11. Purchased by Mr. Call 10
  ―――― Rev. Mr. of Lestwithiel, iii. 24
  Whitehall, iii. 143
  Whiteleigh of Efford, John, i. 313, and Richard 313 _bis_.――Richard,
    ii. 43, 109, 189. Whitleigh of Efford 419. Joanna, Margaret, and
    Richard, ib.
  Whitford, Rev. Mr. of Poundstock, iii. 352
  Whiting, Rev. William, of St. Martin’s in Meneage, iii. 126
  Whitminster family and heir, iv. 16
  Whitmore, Mr. iii. 90
  Whitsand, or Whitsend bay, iii. 310, 433, 435.――Excavation at, ii. 252
  Whitstone parish, i. 133――iii. 86――iv. 39, 40
  WHITSTONE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, barton of Bennet, iv. 152. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, etymology, ib. A rectory, value, patron,
    incumbent, manor, name of the parish derived from it, Whitaker
    153. By Editor, church and tower fine and well seated, monuments,
    patron, and incumbent, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 154
  Whitsuntide, iii. 427.――Celebrated at Wilton by Canute, iv. 96
  Whittington, i. 121, 262.――Blanche, John and Thomas, iii. 317.
    William 316, 317 _bis_
  Wickliffe, iii. 163.――John, i. 314
  Widemouth, west, manor, iii. 353
  Widislade, ii. 427
  Wiedbury, ii. 292
  Wight, Isle of, a battle off, ii. 342
  Wike St. Mary, parish, i. 296――iv. 40, 59, 152 _bis_
  Wilgress, Rev. J. T. ii. 144
  Wilkes, John, i. 173.――Mr. ii. 245
  Wilkin, John, ii. 189
  Wilkins, Rev. Mr. ii. 372
  Wilkinson, William, ii. 189
  William, Rev. Anthony, rector of St. Keverne, rendered insensible by
    a storm during divine service, ii. 324. Sends an account of it to
    the Royal Society, ib.
  ―――― son of the Earl of Morton, ii. 211
  ―――― the Conqueror, i. 43, 241, 367――ii. 89, 118, 130, 147, 175, 176
    _bis_, 210, 211 _ter._, 235, 237, 238, 259, 310, 344, 379, 384, 399,
    418――iii. 22, 44, 46, 114, 129, 134, 142, 276, 291, 346, 349, 352,
    422, 451 _bis_, 456. Charter of 114, 117――iv. 14, 15, 62, 67, 102,
    118, 153
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 50, 51, 59, 62, 80, 92, 94, 106, 129, 145, 155,
    175, 253, 257, 259, 273, 299, 315, 332, 335――iii. 64, 74, 79, 101,
    114, 115, 118, 139, 391――iv. 184
  ―――― Rufus, ii. 147, 211 _bis_, 344――iii. 462――iv. 140
  ―――― 3rd, i. 46――ii. 51, 54, 76, 89, 112, 127, 255, 277, 278,
    301――iii. 15, 78, 148, 168, 176, 182, 186, 195, 199, 208, 222, 237,
    297 _bis_, 417, 421――iv. 22, 107, 116 _ter._, 152, 160
  ―――― and Mary, ii. 236
  ―――― 4th, King, iv. 18
  ―――― Duke of Normandy, iii. 462
  ―――― of Malmesbury, i. 200――iv. 96
  Williams, i. 16, 158, 210, 387. Edward 272, 276. Rev. Humphrey 355.
    Jane 357. John 154, 277.――John, ii. 134. Richard 256. Mr. 157.
    Family 336.――Rev. Anthony of St. Kevern, iii. 88. Courtenay 367.
    John 350. Thos. of Lombard Street, London 162. Three Misses 343. Mr.
    82, 363. Family 343, 363.――John, iv. 55. Mr. 74. Henry 77
  ―――― of Bodenick, or Boderick, William, i. 319.――William, ii. 410, 411
  ―――― of Carmanton, John, i. 225.――(or Willyams) of Carnanton, Anne,
    iii. 229. Humphrey 151. John 229
  ―――― of Carvean, Catherine, John, iii. 355. Mary 355, 362. Arms 355
  ―――― of Dorset or Wilts, arms, iii. 145
  ―――― of Helston, John, i. 357
  ―――― of Herringston in Dorset, Mr. family, and arms, iii. 356
  ―――― of Probus, i. 396――ii. 54
  ―――― of Rosworthy, John, and arms, iii. 145
  ―――― of St. Blazey, Hugh, his marriages, and death, i. 53. Building
    a new house 54. Arms 53
  ―――― of Tregenna, John, i. 420
  ―――― of Trehane, i. 400.――Mary and Mr. iii. 366
  ―――― of Trevorva, arms, iii. 355
  ―――― of Trewithan, Richard, i. 53, 225.――Courtenay, iii. 356
  ―――― of Trewithgy, William, iii. 355
  ―――― of Truthan, i. 398 _bis_. John 396, 398. Arms 396
  Willington family, iii. 348
  Willis, Andrew, killed at Skewis, i. 276 _bis_
  ―――― Browne, ii. 200――iii. 120, 268, 459.――His additions to Camden,
    i. 257, 339. Notitia Parliamentaria 200――ii. 68, 403――iii. 14, 16,
    17, 24, 25, 26, 27――iv. 117.――Account of St. German’s priory, ii.
    69, 71, 72. Of Launceston 422, 423
  ―――― of Fen Ditton, Bart. Sir Thomas and Sir William, ii. 97
  ―――― of London, Dorothy and Thomas, ii. 97
  Willoughby, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186. Family 313
  ―――― de Broke, Lord, ii. 231.――Family, iii. 47
  Wills, Rev. Mr. i. 383.――Anthony offers himself and six sons to King
    William 3rd, ii. 112. Rev. Thomas 139 _bis_. Rev. Thomas, vicar of
    Wendron 326.――Rev. Mr. of Mullion, iii. 257
  Wills of Helston, Matthew, ii. 139, 326
  ―――― of Wivelscomb, iii. 269
  Willyams of Cannerton, Anne, John, John and Oliver, ii. 85
  Wilow, St. ii. 411.――By Leland, iv. 279
  Wilson’s Martyrology, iii. 385
  Wilton, Canute celebrated Whitsuntide at, iv. 96
  ―――― abbey, Wilts, iii. 291.――St. Udith, abbess of, iv. 93. Built
    St. Denis church at, and was buried there 94.――Priors of, ii. 291
  ―――― convent at, iv. 96
  ―――― of Dunveth, Miss, John, iv. 3
  Wiltshire, i. 334
  ―――― William Lord Scrope, Earl of, Lord treasurer, iii. 129
  Wimbourn Minster, iv. 126
  Winchelsea, its naval armaments defeated Fowey, ii. 45
  Winchester, i. 326, 327, 336――ii. 139.――Rebels march through, i. 87
  ―――― Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of, ii. 194.――Jonathan Trelawney, iii.
    295,  297
  ―――― Levignus, monk of, ii. 60
  ―――― measure, iii. 182
  Windham, Madam, iii. 449. Mr. 449 _ter._
  Windsor, i. 146 _bis_
  ―――― collegiate church, i. 341
  ―――― dean and chapter of, ii. 72
  ―――― poor knights of, ii. 52, 54, 55
  ―――― Gerald de, i. 34. Otho de 34 _bis_. Walter de 34. William de
    34, 35
  ―――― Lord, i. 34
  Winenton in Kerrier, iii. 133
  Winfred, St. iv. 126
  Wingfield, Miss, i. 266――ii. 243.――Family, iv. 156
  Winnocus, St. and his history, iv. 157
  Winnous, St. by Leland, iv. 278
  Winnow manor, ii. 252
  ―――― St. downs, iv. 29, 186 _bis_, 188
  ―――― St. parish, i. 113, 421, 358, 376, 379, 390――iii. 24――iv. 111,
    184.――Rev. Robert Walker, vicar of, ii. 34
  WINNOW, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint’s name,
    ancient name, value of benefice, incumbent, land tax, St. Nectan’s
    chapel. History of the saint, his chapel at Hartland, built by
    Goditha, daughter of Earl Godwin, the Earl attributing his
    preservation in a tempest at sea to the saint’s intercession, iv.
    155. Barton and manor of St. Winow, its possessors 156. Tethe,
    Trevego, Laran bridge 157. By Tonkin, saint, his history, Bergh St.
    Winnox, benefice, a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation ibid. By Editor, beautiful situation of the church,
    vicarage house and glebe, Mr. Walker, chapel, Ethy, notice of
    Admiral Penrose 158. Statistics, the vicars, value of the benefice,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 159
  Winnow, St. vicarage, beauty of, iv. 158
  Winock, St. abbey, at Bergh in Flanders, iii. 33
  Winotus, St. iv. 155
  Winow, St. barton and manor, iv. 156
  Winslade, i. 7
  ―――― of Tregarrick, or St. Agnes, William, ii. 192
  Winsloe, Mr. ii. 399
  Winslow, Rev. R. of Minster, iii. 236 _bis_. Thomas, took the name
    of Phillips 235
  Winstanley of Littlebury, Essex, built the first lighthouse at
    Eddystone, iii. 376 _ter._
  Winter of Sydney, Sir John, i. 398
  ―――― of Kellyfreth, ii. 304. Arms, ib.
  ―――― an eminent family of Gloucestershire, ii. 304
  Winwaloe, St. iv. 60
  Winwallo, St. ii. 127. His history 127, 128 _ter._
  Winwolaus of Tremene chapel, iv. 60
  Wise, i. 370
  ―――― of Stoke Damarel, i. 266
  Witchalse, Benet and his daughter, iii. 199
  Withal rectory house, i. 75
  Withel parish, iii. 391, 395.――Withell, ii. 94, 335.――Withiel, i.
    115――ii. 384――iv. 137, 140
  Withell goose manor, iv. 160 _bis_
  Withering, Dr. ii. 331.――The botanist, iii. 173
  Witherington, Dr. i. 150
  Withiel church, i. 74
  ―――― parish, _see Withel_
  WITHIEL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, iv. 160.
    Rectory house built, Burnevas, Trenance, family, and arms, Bryn 161.
    Birth of Sir Bevill Grenville 162. By Tonkin, situation, value of
    benefice, appropriation, a rectory, value, incumbent ibid. By
    Editor, rectory house improved, Trewren monument, statistics,
    incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 163
  Withroe manor, ii. 252
  Withyel, Richard Trewren, rector of, i. 376
  Wivelsberge, advowson of, iii. 115
  Wodehouse, ii. 117. Lord, is the representative of the Killigrew
    family 23
  Wolf, the, iv. 173
  Wolfchild, Lady, mother of St. Udith, iv. 93
  Wolfe, General, iii. 218
  Wolfran, St. and his festival, iv. 117
  Wollacombe of Devon, Mr. iii. 222 _bis_
  Wollas, iii. 258
  Wolphard, abbot, iv. 126
  Wolpher, King of Mercia, iv. 125
  Wolridge, Thomas, iii. 374
  ―――― of Gorminick, John, i. 420
  Wolrige, Dr. Hugh, monument to, and John, iii. 454
  Wolsey, Cardinal, ii. 361――iii. 299 _bis_
  Wolsey’s survey, iii. 340
  Wolvedon, or Goulden, barton, in St. Probus and Tregony, iii. 359.
    Fort on 365
  ―――― of Golden, Charles or Christopher, i. 297
  Wolverston, i. 136
  ―――― of Wolverston, ii. 5
  Wood, i. 76, 210――ii. 215.――Anthony, iii. 251――iv. 144. His Annals
    144.――His Athenæ Oxonienses, ii. 233――iii. 296――iv. 86. His Fasti
    144.――William, ii. 353.――Rev. William, junior, iii. 450.――Rev.
    William of Withiel, iv. 162. Rev. Mr. of Treneglos 61. Rev. Mr. of
    Warbstow 125. Rev. Mr. of Withiel 160
  ―――― Knowle, iii. 117
  Woodberry, i. 168
  Woodland, Sir William, iii. 239
  ―――― street, i. 79
  Woodley, Rev. C. W. of Stithians, iv. 5
  Woodly village, ii. 385
  Woodvill, Lionel, Bishop of Salisbury, ii. 194. Richard Earl Rivers 194
  Woolcock, ii. 192.――J. H. iii. 387
  Woolcombe, Rev. Charles of Minster, iii. 236. Rev. William of
    Pillaton 347
  Woolcumbe, Mr. ii. 279
  ―――― of Longford hill, ii. 279
  Woolford village, iii. 255
  Woolley, J. T. i. 314, 315.――James, iii. 346. Mr. 163
  ―――― village, iii. 255
  Woolridge, Rector of St. Michael Penkivell, i. 256.――Rev. Mr. of
    Tywardreth, iv. 99
  ―――― of Carlynike, John, and arms, i. 256
  Woolrington, John de, i. 246
  Woolston, George, shot in Rogers’s affray, i. 274 _quat._, 275
    _ter._――Mr. iii. 366
  ―――― manor, iii. 353
  Worcester, St. Chad, patron of, ii. 391
  ―――― Florence of, iii. 310――iv. 168
  ―――― William of, ii. 203, 204, 206――iii. 223, 292, 350.――His
    Itinerary, Appendix 6, iv. 222 to 256. Containing his life 222.
    List of Cornish castles 228. Itinerary from Polston Brygge to
    Porthenys 229. List of the Scilly islands and of obits 230.
    Memoranda 231. List of rivers 233. Memoranda from Thomas Peperelle
    234. Extracts from the Bodman kalendar 236. Sources of the rivers,
    and a list of islands 237. Account of Bodman, and an extract from
    the Martyrology 238. From Bodman kalendar 239. From Bodman
    register respecting the plague, and memoranda from Robert Bracey
    240. Verses at Tavistock and extract from the Tavistock kalendar
    241. Property of Penryn college 242. Itinerary from North sea to
    the Thamar river 243. List of the havens 244. Itinerary from
    Penzance to Plymton 245. Memoranda from the kalendar of Mont
    Myghele, journey from Weare to Manchew 249. Various memoranda 250
    to 252. Dates of the above journey 252 to 255. Bridges in Cornwall
    from Exeter to St. Michael’s mount 255
  Worcester, William Worth, Archdeacon of, iii. 62
  ―――― William Lloyd, Bishop of, iii. 299
  ―――― college, Oxford, ii. 233
  Worcestershire, ii. 147――iii. 344
  Woronus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Worsley, Rev. Charles, rector of Leskeard, iii. 23
  Worth, i. 240.――Mr. ii. 97.――John, iii. 60, 62 _bis_. Built a house
    at Tremogh 62. Family and marriage of the heiress ibid.
  ―――― of Penryn, John son of John, William, and William, D.D. iii. 62
  ―――― of Worth, family and arms, iii. 60
  Wortha, Higher, iii. 258
  ―――― Lower, iii. 258
  Worthyvale manor, iii. 234 _bis_, 236. King Arthur received his
    death wound at 236
  Wotton, account of, ii. 362. The barton of Trelugan manor 363
  ―――― cross village, ii. 362
  Wray, William, iii. 358
  Wrey, Elizabeth and Sir William, i. 210.――Rev. H. B. ii. 416.――Sir
    William, iii. 16.――Sir Bourchier, iv. 112. Rev. W. B. 50. Family 110
    _bis_. Of Devon 50
  ―――― of Trebigh, Sir Bourchier, Sir Chichester John _bis_, William
    _bis_, and arms, i. 411
  Wright, ii. 130, 253, 375
  Wring Cheese, i. 178, 179. Described 184, 190
  Wringworthy, Higher, iii. 246
  ―――― manor, iii. 252
  Wroughton, Miss, ii. 218
  Wulrington, ii. 430
  Wulvedon, by Leland, iv. 272
  Wykeham, William of, iii. 171
  Wyllacombe, iv. 29
  Wylliams of Roseworthy in Gwyniar, Ann, iii. 159. Rev. Cooper 159,
    160. Rector of Kingston near Canterbury, his works 160. Humphrey
    James and James 159. John 159 _bis_, 160. John and John 159. John O.
    159 _bis_. An anecdote he told 160. Thomas Captain 159
  Wymer, St. ii. 142
  Wymond, Mr. i. 78.――Family and coheirs, iv. 113
  Wymondesham, W. de, iv. 44
  Wymondeston, W. de, iv. 46
  Wymondham, William de, i. 383
  Wymp, i. 2
  Wynn, Right Hon. Charles Williams, M.P. ii. 20
  Wynnanton, ii. 126, 128
  Wynne, i. 163, 400, 401. Rev. Dr. Luttrell 164, 401 _ter._, 402
    _ter._, 403.――Rev. Dr. ii. 114
  Wynnenton, i. 241
  Wynnock, St. parish, ii. 358
  Wyse, William, iv. 147

  Xantus, Prince of Caretica, i. 300
  Xenophon, translations from, ii. 76
  Xysten, St. i. 88

  Yealm bridge, iii. 283
  Yeard, Richard, i. 210
  Yellow Leigh manor, ii. 416
  Yeo family, ii. 86, 416.――Arms 87
  ―――― of Trevelver family, iii. 240
  Yescombe, E. B. monument to, iii. 229
  York, i. 397――ii. 213
  ―――― Archbishop of, i. 139――ii. 90.――St. Paulinus the first, iii.
    284, 285
  ―――― county, i. 258――ii. 76――iv. 42.――Chalk hills in, iii. 10
  ―――― diocese, iv. 42
  ―――― Duke of, ii. 94. James 27. His engagement with the Dutch fleet,
    and letter of thanks to Captain Penrose 28.――Richard, i. 168, 169
    _ter._――ii. 260
  ―――― William, ii. 189
  ―――― house of, i. 169――ii. 108, 185, 186 _bis_, 187
  ―――― street, near Covent Garden, iii. 252
  ―――― and Lancaster wars, iii. 199
  Yorke of Somersetshire, Humphrey settled at Trevassack, Richard of
    Wellington, Sarah, and family, iii. 342
  Young, Rev. Denis, iii. 256
  Yse, i. 2

  Zamkees the Samothracian, i. 24
  Zealand, iii. 227
  Zela, i. 20
  ZENNAR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, land tax, founder and
    impropriator, soil, tin, Chapel Jane, iv. 164. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, name, a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent
    ibid. By Editor, beauty of the scenery, fertile, church and tower,
    bells inscribed, no saint to be found, feast, St. John Lateran
    church at Rome, Trereen Dinas, or the Gurnet’s head 165. Editor
    purchased it for its geological interest, impropriation,
    statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 166
  Zennor parish, i. 132――iii. 242――iv. 52, 53, 54
  Zouch, Lord, i. 170――John Lord, iii. 102




ERRATA.


VOLUME III.

  P. 30, line 20, _for_ towers, _read_ tors.
  P. 55, line 12, _for_ scale, _read_ scales.
  P. 85, line 7 from the foot, _for_ thus, _read_ then.
  P. 86, line 10, _for_ Whilstone, _read_ Whitstone.
  P. 87, lines 14 and 18, _for_ Perkin, _read_ Parkin.
  P. 88, line 16, _for_ Heckens, _read_ Hechins.
  P. 91, line 7, _for_ Heckins, _read_ Hechins.
  P. 136, last line, _for_ Modford, _read_ Madford.
  P. 138, lines 28, 29, _dele_ the present rector.
  P. 178, line 15, _for_ St. Ives, _read_ St. Ive.
  P. 230, line 21, _for_ eria, _read_ erica.
  P. 307, line 22, _for_ Episcopus, _read_ Episcopi.
  P. 350, line 27, _for_ Troad, _read_ Trood.
  P. 461, line 7, _for_ Coat, _read_ Cock.




END OF VOL. III.




J. B. NICHOLS AND SON, 25, PARLIAMENT-STREET.




Transcriber’s Note:

This book was written in a period when many words and names had not
become standardized in their spelling. Words may have multiple
spelling variations or inconsistent hyphenation in the text. These
have been left unchanged. Dialect, obsolete and alternative spellings
were left unchanged, as were misspelled words, incorrect use of
homonyms, and sentences without verbs. Words and phrases in italics
are surrounded by underscores, _like this_. Superscripted characters
are preceded by a carat, e.g. Gen^l. The book used hyphens, dots, and
spaces of various lengths to indicate unknown names, dates or words.
For consistency, these were changed to four dashes: ――――. Insular
letters were replaced with contemporary equivalents.

Obvious printing errors, such as backwards, upside down, missing or
partially printed letters, were corrected. Unprinted punctuation and
final stops missing at the end of abbreviations and sentences were
added. Duplicated words were removed, as were duplicate letters after
rejoining words that were hyphenated at the end of a line. Excess spaces
in abbreviations of titles, D.D. and M.D., were removed.

Footnotes were numbered in order and moved to the end of the
chapter in which the related anchors occur. A footnote anchor in
The “Manor of Sheviock” was deleted after the text, “for this
manor was at this time his inheritance,” as there is no footnote
in the chapter.

Noted, not changed:

  ―― In the table for Maddern, the sum of value of Real Property and
     the sum of 1801 population do not add to the totals provided.
  ―― Occasionally, the abbreviations for shillings or pence were omitted
     from the text.
  ―― In the chapter of St. Neot, the transcription of the Sanctus Neotus
     contained consonants with tildes above or through the letter.
     These were transcribed with the tilde in brackets preceding
     the letter, like this: [~b].

The book contains the following pen and ink changes made by an unknown
hand. The changes were not made to the text, but are indicated below
in parentheses:

  ―― … mentioned under St. Ewan (Erme) …
  ―― … Marperian (Marpesian) rock …
  ―― … to distress (disturb) a dying man …
  ―― … under the assumed name ―――― (of Peter) Pindar.…
  ―― … the son (in law) of his sister,…
  ―― … viro inter hæc menia (mœnia) semper memorando …
  ―― … probably to St. Enny (Euny) …
  ―― … this house (name) may indicate …
  ―― … The late vicar Mr. Sechell (Scotell) …

The following were changed:

  ―― Column headers were added to table for Sancreed.
  ―― The Greek word κελιδον was changed to χελιδων.

The list of errata at the end of the book appears only in Volume 1,
and the Index appears only in Volume 4. Both were added for the
convenience of readers.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Parochial History of Cornwall,
Volume 3 (of 4), by Davies Gilbert

